Glutamate receptors: The cause or cure in perinatal white matter injury?
R. Douglas Fields
Nervous System Development and Plasticity Section, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States
Abstract
Glutamate toxicity from hypoxia-ischemia during the perinatal period causes white matter injury that can result in long-term motor and intellectual disability. Blocking ionotropic glutamate receptors has been shown to inhibit oligodendrocyte injury  in vitro , but glutamate receptor antagonists have not yet proven helpful in clinical studies. The opposite approach of activating glutamate receptors on developing oligodendrocytes shows promise in experimental studies on rodents. Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors are expressed transiently on developing oligodendrocytes in humans during the perinatal period, and the blood-brain-barrier permeable agonist of group I mGluRs, ACPD (1-aminocyclopentane-trans-1,3,-dicarboxylic acid), reduces white matter damage significantly in a rat model of perinatal hypoxia-ischemia. The results suggest drugs activating this class of glutamate receptors could provide a new therapeutic approach for preventing cerebral palsy and other neurological consequences of diffuse white matter injury in premature infants.
INTRODUCTION
Hypoxia-ischemia (HI) is a common cause of brain damage in premature and term infants. Cerebral palsy, epilepsy, learning disorders, intellectual disability, and other neurological difficulties are the life-long consequences for many of the 63,000 infants born annually with very low birth weight as a consequence of underdeveloped pulmonary function in preterm infants ( ;  ;  ) in addition to infants suffering asphyxia at birth . Major motor deficits including cerebral palsy are present in 5–10% of very low birth weight babies ( ;  ). Many biological processes are susceptible to hypoxic injury during this developmental period, but injury to white matter, termed periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) or diffuse white matter injury, is the most prevalent effect. Death of oligodendrocytes and impairment of myelination are a primary pathophysiological basis for perinatal brain injuries because this developmental period coincides with a vulnerable time when oligodendrocyte precursors are proliferating and immature oligodendrocytes are differentiation and beginning to myelinate axons (Beck et al., 2001).
It is well established that the increase in extracellular glutamate during HI initiates excitotoxic injury and cell death (reviewd see  ;  ;  ), which is why the study by Jantzie et al, in this issue of  Neuron Glia Biology  (xx cite reference) is noteworthy. It shows that activating a specific type of glutamate receptor on developing oligodendrocytes cuts white matter injury in half in a rat model of PVL. High concentrations of agonists for AMPA receptors are toxic to oligodendrocytes in culture  and in optic nerve  and other white matter tracts  in vivo  ( ;  ). NMDA receptor activation also damages oligodendrocytes ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ). Calcium influx through the NMDA receptor and through AMPA receptors lacking the GluR2 subunit  is thought to initiate the deleterious effects of high levels of extracellular glutamate. Removal of extracellular calcium or application of AMPA receptor antagonists protects oligodendrocytes from HI injury ( ;  ;  ), but the consequences of activating metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) in oligodendrocytes is not well understood. In a brief report in 2001,   showed that mGluR agonists limited kainate-induced oligodendrocyte death, and in 2006 Lyut et al, (2006) showed that activation of mGluR5 protects oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) and oligodendrocytes from staurosporine-induced apoptosis.
In their studies, Jantzie et al., (p. xx of this issue) show that mGluR1 and mGluR5 receptors are present in human and rodent white matter during this critical perinatal period for white matter development, and that expression of these receptors is regulated developmentally. In white matter, mGluR1 and mGluR5 are prominently localized on cell bodies of GalC-positive oligodendrocytes at early ages, but at later ages the receptors become expressed almost exclusively on oligodendrocyte cell processes. At the perinatal period when expression of mGluR1 and mGluR5 peaks in white matter, these receptors are minimally present on microglia and astrocytes, but at later ages (second postnatal week) expression increases on these nonmyelinating glia as expression diminishes on GalC-positive oligodenrocytes. Neuronal expression of mGluRs is also lower during the period of peak mGluR expression in oligodendrocytes. These cellular differences in mGluR expression provide the opportunity for preferentially targeting oligodendrocytes during the perinatal period with drugs acting on these receptors.
Previous  in vitro  studies by these investigators had shown that activating group I mGluRs with ACPD or DHPG (3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine) protected oligodendrocytes from oxygen and glucose deprivation through intracellular signaling pathways that maintain glutathione (an antioxidant), decreasing production of damaging reactive oxygen species . Here the authors report that systemically administering ACPD, a brain-permeable compound, significantly attenuated white matter injury in a rat model of PVL. The treatment caused no significant increase in seizures, presumably because of the low expression of mGluRs on neurons at this age. Thus, group I mGluRs may represent a therapeutic target for protection from HI-mediated white matter injury during the perinatal period.
Further research will be necessary to determine the detailed mechanisms by which mGluR activation protects against hypoxia-induced white matter injury, because HI injury in the perinatal period is a complex multifactorial pathology, and mGluR receptors are expressed on other cells. One intriguing possibility is that in addition to promoting survival of oligodendrocytes, mGluR activation might stimulate the formation of myelin. This possibility is suggested by new studies showing that the initial events in myelination, including formation of oligodendrocyte-axon signaling domains and local translation of myelin basic protein, are stimulated by vesicular release of glutamate from axons firing action potentials . Pharmacological studies implicate both NMDA and mGluR receptors in this activity-dependent mechanism, but inhibiting mGluR receptors independently of NMDA receptors reduced local translation of MBP by 50% , indicating a significant involvement of mGluRs on oligodendrocyte cell processes in cell-cell signaling initiating myelination of specific axons.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES