Persistence of mercury-induced motor and sensory neurotoxicity: systematic review of workers remotely exposed to mercury vapor
Cheryl A. Fields
Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Jonathan Borak
Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology & Public Health, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Elan D. Louis
Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, and Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA
Associated Data
Abstract
Background
Elemental mercury (Hg 0 ) is a well-recognized neurotoxicant, but it is uncertain whether and for how long its neurotoxicity persists. Among studies that evaluated  previously-exposed  workers, only one examined workers during and also years after exposure had ceased.
Objective
To create a series of ‘synthetic’ longitudinal studies to address the question of persistence of Hg 0  neurotoxicity in occupationally exposed workers.
Methods
We systematically reviewed studies describing objective motor and sensory effects in  previously-exposed  mercury workers. Data from physical examination (PE), neurobehavioral (NB) tests and electrophysiological studies were extracted into structured tables and examined for their consistency and dose-relatedness and then compared with the corresponding results from studies of currently-exposed workers.
Results
We identified six cohorts that described neurological findings in 1299 workers, examined an average of 4.8 to 30 years after the cessation of exposure. Historical group mean U Hg  levels ranged from 23 to >500 μg/L, with U Hg  levels >6000 μg/L in some individuals. Overall, few findings were significant; most were inconsistent across the remote-exposure studies, and in comparisons between studies of remotely- and currently-exposed workers.
Conclusion
The results of this systematic review indicate that Hg 0 -related neurotoxic effects detectable on PE, NB testing, and EPS are substantially reversed over time. To the extent that such effects do persist, they are reported principally in workers who have had very high dose exposures. In addition, based on limited available data, those effects reported to persist have been described as having little or no functional significance.
Introduction
The neurotoxicity associated with long-term occupational exposure to elemental mercury vapor (Hg 0 ) has been well described ( ;  ). Less certain is whether and for how long objective findings of toxicity persist following cessation of exposure. Some case reports describe the persistence of neurological abnormalities ( ;  ), while others indicate that such toxic effects may be transient ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ). Reversal of neurotoxicity has been documented even in workers following massive exposures (e.g. 24-hour urine mercury levels of 1495-7950 μg) .
One explanation for this uncertainty is the general lack of longitudinal studies evaluating the neurological function of mercury-exposed workers during exposure and then years following exposure cessation. We are aware of only one study that evaluated neurological effects longitudinally in workers during active exposure and then again years after exposure cessation. But that study, which only included workers with relatively low exposure levels not expected to cause objective changes, found no significant differences on neurobehavioral tests between workers and controls for either time period ( ;  ). Thus it provides no insights regarding persistence.
There also exist a small number of studies that described only the results of neurological examinations of mercury-exposed workers performed years  after  the cessation of their exposures (i.e. ‘previous-exposure’) of which some also described the workers' historical levels of Hg 0  exposure. They reported sometimes significant, but seemingly inconsistent findings and, as a group, they have not been the subject of critical review or comparison. Moreover, because none of these studies evaluated the neurological status of the study workers while they were being actively exposed, it is uncertain whether the reported findings represented a change from the workers' neurological status during active exposure.
Lacking informationally-useful longitudinal studies on the persistence of Hg 0  toxicity, we created a series of ‘synthetic’ longitudinal studies to address the question of persistence. In the first step, we performed a systematic literature review to identify studies that described neurological findings in groups of workers during on-going Hg 0  exposure (i.e. ‘currently-exposed’ workers). We then documented the type and frequencies of objective neurological effects reported in those studies, stratified according to their group mean U Hg  into four exposure categories. We presumed that the most consistently reported effects that also displayed a dose-related pattern across studies were more likely to be the consequence of Hg exposure, and as such they could provide a first approximation of the neurological effects that one would have expected in the previously-exposed workers had they been examined during active exposure to comparable levels of Hg 0 . The findings of that review are presented in a companion article (Fields et al. in press).
In the second step, we summarized the types, frequencies, and dose-relatedness of neurological findings reported in the previous-exposure studies and compared them to the corresponding findings reported in studies of currently-exposed workers with Hg 0  exposure levels similar to those documented historically. Differences or similarities in the prevalence of specific neurological findings between the previously- and currently-exposed workers could thus serve as an indirect measure of the persistence or change in dose-related neurotoxic effects following exposure cessation.
The present report describes the methods and findings of that ‘second step’.
Methods
Identification and selection of studies
A comprehensive literature search was performed to identify studies that evaluated neurological effects in workers after their exposure to elemental mercury had ceased. Studies were located by searching MEDLINE (1950 – December 15, 2015) using multiple search terms: neurotoxicity or toxicity or health effects; and elemental mercury or mercury vapor or occupational exposure to mercury vapor. We also examined international and government agency reports and reviewed reference lists from identified studies to ensure that all relevant studies were included in this review (details of our search methods are presented in Fields et al. (in press). We considered studies published in English, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Japanese languages. Included for analysis were peer-reviewed cohort studies that described: 1) workers that had been occupationally exposed to Hg 0  vapor, but not other forms of mercury, generally for at least 3 months; 2) the level of Hg 0  exposure documented by measurements of mercury in urine, blood, or workplace air; 3) neurological effects involving motor function and/or sensory function; 4) testing methods and objective neurological findings from evaluations performed at least one year after exposure to mercury had ceased. Information from non-peer-reviewed publications was considered if it pertained to an eligible study. We did not consider neurological effects related to memory and cognitive function, as these findings were the subject of a meta-analysis  and systematic review .
Our analysis focused on objective effects that could be measured using validated methods; subjective symptoms were not included. In addition, some study authors qualified their findings as either ‘clinical’ or ‘subclinical’. Unless otherwise stated, we assumed these terms were used in accordance with the following definition: ‘ Subclinical  toxicity refers to exposure-induced adverse effects that are too small to produce signs and symptoms evident in a standard clinical examination’ . Null findings were those that were not statistically significant or were paradoxical (i.e. yielded findings that suggested mercury exposure improved performance).
Data extraction
Objective motor and sensory effects described in studies were extracted and tabulated into three categories reflecting the general types of evaluations used to examine workers: Physical Examination (PE); Neurobehavioral tests (NB); and Electrophysiological Studies (EPS). The PE category included mainly qualitative findings from clinical neurological examination; the NB category included results from functional performance tests that yield quantitative measures of tremor, motor and sensory functions, color vision, and balance; and the EPS category included quantitative findings from nerve conduction studies, electromyography, evoked potentials and electroencephalography. To permit comparisons across studies, examination findings and test results were further organized by domain (e.g. motor vs. sensory), and then, when sufficient details were provided, according to specific test (e.g. nerve conduction), outcome evaluated (e.g. distal latency) and anatomic localization (e.g. median sensory nerve).
Studies used a variety of NB functional performance tests to evaluate motor skills other than steadiness (used to detect tremor). Tests included those that assess only motor skills (i.e. dexterity, motor speed and grip strength) and those that assess motor ability as well as other abilities such as correct perception/information processing (i.e. perceptual motor speed, attention and reaction time). Because the latter set of tests does not provide information exclusively about motor function, we analysed those results (referred to as ‘motor accuracy’) separately from the results of tests that assessed only motor skills (referred to as ‘motor function’) (Goldstein and Sanders 2004).
We summarized the results reported for  ‘exposure effects’  (i.e. comparisons between exposed vs. controls) separately from results reported for  ‘dose effects’  (i.e. the dose-response associations between neurological findings and differing levels or patterns of exposure).
We stratified cohorts into exposure categories according to group mean urine mercury (U Hg ) levels determined during the period of active exposure, expressed as μg/L. The results of our analyses are stratified into the following four categories of exposure:
The final category (‘<BEI’) refers to the Biological Exposure Index, a health-based guideline recommended by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists that ‘generally indicates the concentration below which nearly all workers should not experience adverse health effects’ (American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists  ). Prior to 2014, the era that included even the most recent of the reviewed studies, the BEI for elemental mercury was 35 μg/g creatinine (  ACGIH 2014).
Results
Studies and study populations
We identified 13 published studies from four countries that evaluated neurological effects in nine separate cohorts of workers with historical exposure to mercury vapor ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ,  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ). Three of the 13 studies were excluded from further analysis, one because it described workers who had suffered only acute (16-hour) accidental exposure , another because it had no control group and provided few methodological details , and the third because workers had also been exposed to organic Hg . Thus, our analysis was limited to 10 studies that evaluated motor and sensory neurological effects in six cohorts that met our criteria; findings were described in a total of 1299 mostly male workers (675 historically-exposed workers and 624 non-exposed controls). Only one study  included females (<10% of the original study population), but the actual number that participated in neurological evaluations was not stated.   presents the descriptive characteristics of these previous-exposure cohorts. There were three cohorts in the High Exposure category, and one each in the <BEI-, Low-, and Medium Exposure categories.
Table 1
Key :
Abbreviations : Ave = average; Cum = cumulative; NR = not reported.
,  the <BEI Exposure cohort , performed NB testing in 49 workers at a Norwegian chloralkali facility and 49 age-matched male controls employed in a cellulose facility. Exposed and control workers were comparable with regard to education, lifestyle factors, shift work and previous concussions. Exposure to mercury had ceased 4.8 years (range: 4.2-10.0) before testing. Many of the study subjects (41 exposed, 40 controls) had also been examined about five years earlier (during the period of Hg exposure); at that time,   found no significant differences between exposed and control workers' performance on any of the NB measures of dexterity, speed, attention, and reaction time.

Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Male workers employed for at least 1 year; workers whose exposures had ceased more than 10 years prior to the examinations were not included. Exposed and control workers were excluded for ‘alcohol abuse, major head injuries, metabolic, major psychiatric or neurological disease causing severe disability’.

Dose assessment 
Individual dose assessments were based on U Hg  measurements obtained quarterly starting in 1949. Urines were adjusted for creatinine concentration after 1981; samples collected before 1982 were adjusted using the mean of individual creatinine measured in 1982 and 1983. For quarters without U Hg  data, each worker's levels were estimated using the mean of U Hg  measurements collected before and after the missing quarter. These quarterly data were used to calculate the mean U Hg  for each year. Exposures for each worker were characterized as cumulative U Hg  (sum of all mean annual U Hg  levels) and mean exposure intensity (cumulative U Hg /years of exposure).

Dose-response assessment 
The study authors did not evaluate the dose-relatedness of effects in previously-exposed workers, however, multiple linear regression analyses (MLR) were used to evaluate correlations between NB outcomes and exposure status (yes/no) in analyses that included the following covariates: age, shift work, alcohol consumption, smoking or snuffing, history of head injury with loss of consciousness (LOC), medication, and raw score of WAIS Information Test. In addition, they compared the differences between each individual's test scores determined while they were actively exposed and their test scores determined five years after exposures had ceased.
,  the Low Exposure cohort , performed PE, NB testing, and EPS in 139 US chloralkali workers and 107 age-, sex-, and race-matched community controls; after exclusion criteria were applied, the actual number of workers tested varied across each type of evaluation. Exposures had ceased 5.7 years (range: 0-35) before testing. Twenty-six workers had continued to work at the site for 3 years following its closure, but their ‘exposure was felt to be negligible’.

Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Workers were employed for at least 1 year between 1956 and 1994. Exposed and controls with renal failure or acute intoxication (EtOH, drugs) were excluded from all analyses. Additional exclusions from specific peripheral or central nervous system testing were made on a case-by-case basis for the following: use of anticonvulsant or major psychiatric medications; alcoholism; illicit drug use; head trauma with LOC; familial tremor or Parkinson's disease; or a history of stroke, psychosis, cancer chemotherapy, renal disease, trauma to tested limb, or vestibular disease.

Exposure assessment 
Individual exposures from 1956-1994 were reconstructed using a job-exposure matrix (JEM) that incorporated direct-read area air samples data obtained by plant personnel (‘about 25,000′ samples over 488 separate days between 1967 and 1993), and 48 personal samples obtained over 15 days in 1988, 1990 and 1992 by OSHA, NIOSH, and Duke University researchers . However, for 20 of the 38 study years there were no air Hg data; instead, exposure data for those years were ‘interpolated from the earlier and later years based on employee account of factory conditions…’ ( , p.82). Exposures were characterized in terms of mean exposure (2-106 μg/m 3 ), cumulative exposure (1.9-904.7 μg/m 3 -years) and peak (also referred to as ‘maximum’) exposure (7-147 μg/m 3 ).
The JEM air estimates were validated using 590 urine samples obtained from 78 workers by plant personnel during November 1988 - May 1991. Spearman correlation coefficients between the reconstructed air levels and levels estimated from the urinary data were statistically significant for all three metrics (mean exposure: r=0.52; cumulative exposure: r=0.69; and, peak exposure: r=0.74). Notably, those were the only U Hg  measurements that were deemed ‘complete and of relatively high quality’ from more than three decades of facility operation. The mean U Hg  was 72.4 μg/L (13.0-191.5). Based on those data, this cohort was categorized as Low Exposure. However, there is evidence that those U Hg  levels likely underestimated workers' exposures. First, a NIOSH survey of the plant , which measured U Hg  in 89% (58 of 65) exposed workers in April, 1988, reported that mean U Hg  was 136 μg/g creatinine (range 2-689), roughly equivalent to 190 μg/L (range: 3-965). Among the 24 of 58 workers (41%) who worked in the cell room, mean U Hg  was 281 μg/g creatinine, roughly equivalent to 393 μg/L. And, as described in  , Hg 0  air levels peaked in 1987 and then declined during 1988-91; cell room Air Hg  during those three years were 24-45% lower than in the years immediately before and after.

Dose-response assessment 
 used stepwise multiple linear regressions (or logistic regression for dichotomized variables) that included ‘appropriate covariates’ to evaluate ‘exposure effects’ and ‘dose effects’ for each of three continuous air Hg exposure measures: mean exposure, cumulative exposure, and peak exposure. All such analyses of PNS and CNS outcomes included the following covariates: age, ‘other mercury exposures’, ‘other neurotoxins’, fillings, and an index of cumulative alcohol consumption. Additional covariates specific to analyses of PNS outcomes included gender, height, body mass index (BMI), limb temperature), while the covariates for CNS outcomes included race, education, visual contrast sensitivity score, vocabulary score, WRAT-R reading score, and current use of sedative medications.
The Ellingsen Medium Exposure cohort , was described in three related studies ( ;  ;  ) that reported PE, NB testing, and EPS in 77 former workers at a Norwegian chloralkali facility following its closure and 53 age-matched male controls employed at a fertilizer factory. Two workers and one control declined NB testing. Exposed workers and controls were similar with regard to ‘socioeconomic background’ and ‘lifestyle habits’ ( , p. 431). Exposures had ceased on average 12.3 years before testing.

Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Male workers, less than 65 years old at the time of examination, exposed for at least 1 year between 1947 and 1987, with U Hg  levels measured during at least four 3-monthly periods of employment. Exclusion criteria included a history of alcohol abuse, ‘major head injuries’, ‘metabolic disorders’, neurological, psychiatric or other diseases causing ‘severe disability’, and exposure to other known occupational neurotoxicants above ‘specified levels’ .

Exposure/dose assessment 
Individual dose assessments were based on more than 2300 urine Hg measurements obtained quarterly between 1948 and 1987. For each worker, doses were characterized for cumulative U Hg  (sum of annual mean urine levels), mean exposure intensity (cumulative U Hg /years of exposure), and duration (in years). Direct-read area samples for air Hg levels were measured between 1953 and 1987. These data, available as quarterly mean air levels, were used to calculate cumulative air levels (i.e. the sum of quarterly levels for each year). For the years without air Hg data (1947-1953), the calculated mean for 1954 was used.

Dose-response assessment 
Dose-effects were evaluated after stratifying workers into ‘high’- and ‘low’-dose groups and then comparing findings in each of these groups with non-exposed controls. Five different stratification schemes were used in the analyses of outcomes on PE, NB testing, and EPS (the only dose metric evaluated in all three analyses was cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L). Group differences on PE outcomes were compared using chi-squared and Fisher's exact tests. Differences on NB outcomes were compared using analysis of variance (ANOVA) and stepwise multiple linear regression analyses that included the following covariates: current alcohol consumption, age, vocabulary scores, head injuries and shift work. EPS outcomes were evaluated using Mann-Whitney tests, and stepwise multiple linear (or logistic) regression analyses that included age, and current levels of U Hg  and B Hg  in addition to historical dose/exposure metrics.

The Oak Ridge High Exposure cohorts 
Former US mercury-exposed workers at the US Oak Ridge lithium production facility were the subject of PE, NB testing, and EPS performed on two separate occasions and described in two studies. The facility operated from 1953 to 1963 and was then dismantled (1965-66); ‘thus the greatest elemental mercury exposure took place from 1953 to 1966 with a much lower exposure subsequently’ ( , p.3).
 described the initial evaluations, performed in 247 exposed workers, examined 21 years after exposure had ceased, and 255 non-exposed controls frequency-matched by 5-year birth intervals, retirement status, and final job title. The   study summarizes the findings of a doctoral dissertation ; that dissertation contains substantially more detailed exposure and effects data for these workers. Accordingly, the data in the Albers study and the Kallenbach dissertation have been combined (‘Albers cohort’).
Ten years later,   evaluated 89 of the exposed and 83 of the non-exposed workers previously studied by   plus an additional 33 subjects. Because the Letz study was not strictly a follow-up of the Albers study, we considered it a separate cohort (‘Letz cohort’). After exclusion criteria were applied, the remaining workers (79 exposed, 84 controls) were comparable in age, education, and income, although current alcohol consumption was higher in exposed workers (70.9%) than controls (60.7%). Workers were examined 30 or more years after exposure had ceased. A primary aim of the Letz study was to ‘replicate previous findings’ from the earlier  study, because that study had tested ‘a large number of associations between numerous exposure variables’, and ‘a number of the statistically significant associations…were not consistent across exposure measures’ ( , p. 460). A second objective was to better understand ‘age × exposure interactions’, i.e. whether ‘differences in neurologic dysfunction between exposure groups became larger with increasing age of the cohorts’ ( , p.460).

Inclusion/Exclusion criteria 
 identified workers employed at least 4 months between 1953 and 1966, and then selected those with the highest cumulative dose (≈12% of eligible exposed population).   included those of the Albers subjects that were able to participate plus additional workers selected for historically high peaks >600 μg/L or cumulative exposure ≥ 2000 μg/L. Both Albers and Letz excluded acutely intoxicated (EtOH, drugs) subjects from all analyses (PE, NB testing, and EPS). Additional exclusions from specific peripheral or central nervous system testing were made on a case-by-case basis for the following: use of anticonvulsant or major psychiatric medications; alcoholism; illicit drug use; head trauma with LOC; diabetes; or a history of stroke, psychosis, cancer chemotherapy, renal disease, trauma to tested limb, or vestibular disease. Albers reported results with (‘restricted analysis’) and without (‘total group analysis’) consideration of those exclusions; our analyses considered only Albers' ‘restricted analysis’.   reported results for only the restricted analysis and, in addition, excluded workers with ‘mental retardation’.

Exposure/dose assessment 
Individual dose assessments in both studies were based on U Hg  levels obtained on a quarterly basis from 1953-1986. For each worker, seven dose metrics were characterized: cumulative (sum of quarterly average U Hg  levels); duration (number of quarters with ‘detectable’U Hg ); relative peak (worker's single highest U Hg  level); absolute peaks (number of quarters with at least one U Hg  >300 μg/L; number of quarters with at least one U Hg  >600 μg/L), average lifetime U Hg  level for 1953-1966; and the average U Hg  level for 1955-1956, ‘the time period of greatest exposure’.

Dose-response assessment 
Albers and Letz each evaluated associations between neurological outcomes and six dose metrics. The same five metrics were used in both cohorts, but each included a different metric for average U Hg : Albers analyzed the average U Hg  level for 1955-1956, while Letz used the lifetime average U Hg . Dose-relatedness was assessed for all of the outcomes evaluated in the Albers cohort, whereas Letz evaluated only a subset of seven ‘primary’ outcomes to minimize multiple comparisons.

The Hokkaido High Exposure cohort 
Former Japanese mercury miners who had been ‘severely exposed’, many of whom had been hospitalized for mercury poisoning (the majority 5 or more times), were evaluated in a series of overlapping studies an average of 18 years after the mine's closure in 1970. Objective neurological findings from PE and NB tests were described in three studies.   described PE findings in 83 workers given ‘neurological examinations’. Two subsequent studies ( ,  ) described the methods and results of NB testing in 117 workers. In the first of those,   reported ‘exposure effects’ based on a matched-pair analysis limited to exposed workers ‘with a history of mercury intoxication’ (n=76) and an equal number of controls individually matched by age (± 3 years), sex, residence, and education. In the second,   described the correlations between various dose metrics and NB test scores from analyses that included the 76 historically intoxicated workers and 41 workers ‘without mercury intoxication’. The study authors did not provide an explanation for the differing numbers of workers examined in these reports.

Inclusion/exclusion criteria 
Inclusion criteria were not explicitly stated; however  ,  ) noted that all examined workers were male. Exclusion criteria were not discussed.

Exposure/dose assessment 
Kishi and Moriwaka relied upon historical exposure data published in two earlier studies from the same mine that had evaluated workers during active exposure. The   report provides longitudinal exposure and health effects data from 1950 through 1951 for workers monitored by ‘regular health examinations and urine mercury analyses once a month’ ( , p. 294). The Suwa report  provides cross sectional data (PE and U Hg  levels) from workers examined before the closure of the mine. Workers had been exposed to air levels that were ‘usually over 1000 μg/m 3 ’, and historical U Hg  in miners diagnosed with mercury poisoning ranged from 500 to >2000 μg/L in 95% of cases ( ,  ).

Dose-response assessment 
 used stepwise MLR that controlled for ‘potential confounding factors’ (i.e. age, education, frequency of alcohol intake, and current working status) to evaluate correlations between NB test scores and ‘dose effects’ for each of three exposure measures: duration of exposure, job exposure categories, and history of intoxication. Job exposure categories were ‘classified by the exposure to mercury based on the data by Hashiba’ ( , p. 38); ‘mining, refining, and transporting jobs showed higher percentages of having a past history of mercury poisoning’ than maintenance and clerical jobs ( , p. 294). As detailed in  , 70.2-81.5% of workers in mining, refining and transportation jobs were diagnosed with Hg poisoning (range by job type: 58.3-92.9%), in contrast to 12.5-13.5% of workers in maintenance and clerical jobs. MLR analyses that included the ‘product of the subject's age and the presence or absence of a history of mercury intoxication’ were also used to investigate ‘age × exposure’ interactions.
Neurological evaluations
The neurological findings described in the previous-exposure studies are presented below, grouped according to type of evaluation (PE, NB testing, and EPS).

Physical examination 
PE was performed in five of the six previous-exposure cohorts;   did not perform PE. Most of the studies performed comprehensive neurological PEs in exposed and control subjects with qualitative results mainly characterized as ‘normal’, ‘abnormal’ or ‘equivocal’. Semi-quantitative scales were used to judge strength (e.g. 0-5) and deep tendon reflexes (e.g. absent, diminished, normal, hyperactive). By contrast,   examined only formerly exposed workers and did not provide detailed examination methods.
All studies reported the percentage of workers with abnormal findings, but differed in the level of detail provided. Most described results for each test (e.g. finger-to-nose, patellar reflex) and/or functional domains (e.g. motor coordination, deep tendon reflexes), and some reported aggregated findings (e.g. abnormal PE). Differences in how studies tabulated results complicated direct comparisons between studies. One study reported only aggregated findings:   considered a worker to have an abnormal PE if more than five findings were abnormal, and reported the percentage of subjects with such an abnormal PE. By contrast,   defined an abnormal PE as having more than eight abnormal or equivocal findings. In the Ellingsen cohort, test results were not tabulated ‘if less than four exposed subjects and referents had pathological signs’ .
With one exception , studies used statistical analyses to determine whether the percentage of exposed workers with abnormal findings was significantly increased compared to controls and/or significantly correlated with exposure status (exposed vs. not exposed).   presents summary results for seven outcomes on PE. Detailed results from specific tests and for dose-response analyses performed in each of the individual studies are presented in  .
Overview of occupational cohort studies that evaluated the association between previous exposure to elemental mercury vapor and PE outcomes. Studies are listed top to bottom by decreasing group mean UHg values (μg/L) in exposed workers, and category of exposure is denoted (h = high, m = medium, l = low). Abbreviations: DTR: deep tendon reflexes; Exp. Cat.: exposure category; MC: motor coordination; NR: not reported; PE: physical examinations; PN = peripheral neuropathy. *UHg value was converted to μg/L from units originally reported in study, as detailed in  . †Approximation of group mean, based on urine mercury levels from 78 workers (see text for details). ‡  did not evaluate statistical significance of findings (see text for details). ¶Results for PN based on a combination of results from PE and other forms of testing (i.e. NB testing and EPS).

Exposure effects 
Comparisons between exposed and controls yielded few significant differences: reduced sensation was described in three studies, of which one also found evidence of reduced motor coordination (MC).   found no significant difference in the percentage of exposed and control workers with abnormal examinations (8.9% vs. 4.1%, respectively); they did not indicate the types of abnormalities seen. In the Ellingsen cohort, differences were significant for two tests of ‘reduced distal sensation’ and for MC on tests of ‘line walking’ with eyes open, but not with eyes closed . The authors noted that sensory loss ‘due to a single peripheral nerve or root lesion’ may have been related to a greater frequency of ‘lumbar disc disease with sciatica’ and ‘nerve injury caused by accidents’ in the exposed ( , p. 432). Two of the three High Exposure cohorts also reported significantly reduced sensation.   reported that a greater proportion of exposed workers had more than two abnormal or equivocal sensory findings, but did not provide further details.   found significantly more errors on tests of joint position in the exposed, but noted that the finding of reduced distal sensation was ‘complicated’ by significant interactions with ‘several baseline variables’ (i.e. ‘age and lead exposure’) . In the Hokkaido cohort,   examined 83 exposed workers and reported the percentage with tremor (8.4%), ‘ataxia’ (1.2%), abnormal deep tendon reflexes (4.8%), and loss of sensation (3.6%). Because there were no controls, the significance of these findings cannot be determined. Notably, however, the percentage of exposed workers with abnormal findings was lower (2-9-fold) than that reported for corresponding tests in two groups of slightly older controls described in the other previous-exposure studies ( ;  ).   reported no significant differences on Romberg testing.

Dose effects 
Dose effects were assessed in three cohorts. In the Ellingsen cohort, two approaches were used to evaluate dose effects.   compared the prevalence of effects between exposed workers, stratified into high- and low-dose groups, and controls. Significantly increased rates of reduced distal sensation, postural tremor, and impaired coordination were seen in workers (n=62) exposed above the cohort medians for duration (>70 months) plus annual U Hg  levels (>80.6 μg/L) compared to controls. A separate analysis stratified workers above or below the cumulative U Hg  level of 600 μg/L. Compared to controls, workers with cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L had significantly reduced distal sensation; workers with U Hg  levels <600 μg/L did not differ significantly on any outcome.
In the second approach,   evaluated correlations between three historical measures of exposure and dose (cumulative U Hg , cumulative Air Hg , and duration of exposure), comparing results between workers with and without each of two PE findings, ‘postural tremor/impaired coordination’ and ‘reduced distal sensation’. Using logistic regression analyses that included age, postural tremor/impaired coordination was significantly correlated with age and years since first exposure, whereas reduced distal sensation was significantly correlated with cumulative U Hg  and cumulative Air Hg .
In the Albers cohort, dose effects were evaluated in three ways. First, MLR analyses were used to evaluate correlations between PE outcomes and highest-ever peak and/or cumulative urine mercury ( ;  ). ‘Weak but significant’ dose-response relationships (r=0.09-0.13) were found for four outcomes: postural tremor, finger-to-nose, strength, and ‘joint position’ sensation. However, the results for tremor, finger-to-nose, and joint position were ‘substantially influenced’ by ‘no more than 3 subjects’. When those outliers were excluded, the results were no longer significant.
Next, using logistic regression, subjects with one or more peak U Hg  >600 μg/L were compared to subjects without peak U Hg  >600 μg/L  plus  unexposed controls. Significant differences were seen for postural tremor, coordination, Babinski and snout reflexes, and strength. No information was provided regarding differences between the higher peak and lower peak workers (controls excluded) or between the lower peak workers and controls.
Lastly, historical measures of exposure and dose were compared for workers with and without postural tremor. As detailed in  , the restricted analysis showed that tremor had a borderline significant association with higher peak U Hg  (691 vs. 601 μg/L, p=0.08), but no significant associations were seen for the number of U Hg  peaks >300 or >600 μg/L, cumulative U Hg , average U Hg , or duration of exposure. A separate analysis considered the association between the neurologist rating of tremor and number of peak urines >600 μg/L. The proportion of workers with tremor increased as the number of such peaks increased: one (34%; 7/40), two (38%; 17/45), three (59%; 10/17), or four peaks (66%; 2/3). However, severity of tremor was not related to the number of U Hg  peaks >600 μg/L: all the cases of ‘moderate’ tremor were seen in those with none, one, or two peaks, while the subjects with three or more peaks had only ‘trace’ or ‘mild’ tremor.
In the   cohort, dose-relatedness of PE findings was not evaluated.
In the Hokkaido cohort,   described the number of workers with PE abnormalities according to two groups: 31 workers who had been hospitalized for Hg poisoning and 52 ‘severely exposed’ workers who had not been hospitalized. Tremor was more prevalent in the previously hospitalized workers (4/31 vs. 3/52). By contrast, loss of sensation and abnormal DTRs were seen only among workers who had never been hospitalized (3/52 and 4/52, respectively). Ataxia was only reported in one worker. Moriwaka did not report the workers' exposure levels, but the relative magnitude and differences in exposures between those two groups can be inferred as follows. According to  , workers with a history of such hospitalization had spent more time in jobs within, rather than outside the mine. And, as documented in  , average Hg levels inside the mine chute (1.5 mg/m 3 , range: 0.5-3.7) and pitface (2.7 mg/m 3 , range: 0.8-5.6) were much higher than those outside (0.9 mg/m 3 , range: 0.5-1.9).

Neurobehavioral testing 
NB testing was performed in all six of the cohorts using a variety of quantitative tests to assess a range of neurological functions. Studies used statistical analyses to evaluate differences between exposed and non-exposed controls and to identify significant associations between test performance and historical measures of exposure and dose.   presents summary results for six NB outcomes: tremor, motor function, motor accuracy, sensory function, color vision, and balance. Detailed results for specific tests and for dose-response analyses performed in individual studies are presented in  .
Overview of occupational cohort studies that evaluated the association between previous exposure to elemental mercury vapor and six neurobehavioral outcomes. Studies are listed top to bottom by decreasing group mean UHg values (μg/L), and category of exposure is denoted (h = high, m = medium, l = low, b = BEI). Abbreviations: BVRT: Benton Visual Retention Test; CPT: Continuous Performance Test; Dext: dexterity; HE: hand-eye coordination tests of motor steadiness used to measure NB tremor; NB: neurobehavioral; Phy: physiological tests of NB tremor; SD: Symbol Digit/Digit Symbol; SRT: Simple Reaction Time. *Indicates UHg was converted to μg/L from units originally reported in study as described in the Methods section. †Results of motor steadiness tests were tabulated as Tremor (see HE columns for Postural, Intention and Kinetic tremor).
Studies reported the results for the individual tests performed, but the level of detail provided regarding specific test methods and results varied within and across studies. Some described the instruments used, their testing protocols and scoring criteria; others provided only the names of the test and reported test results without further detail. For example, tests of tremor and motor performance were performed in one or both hands. Some studies reported a single test score, either the average of the two hands or the ‘preferred’/’dominant’ hand. Others reported results for both hands separately: some reported results for ‘dominant’ and ‘non-dominant’ hands, while others reported for ‘right’ and ‘left’ hands. One study  did not describe its testing protocol, but provided the ‘primary references to the particular methods used’. In our analyses, results of specific tests were tabulated as ‘significant’ if the study had reported a statistically significant difference in at least one of the tested hands.

NB tremor 
NB testing of tremor was performed in all six cohorts. As detailed below, studies assessed tremor using  physiological techniques  that involve the use of sensors to measure specific tremor parameters (e.g. amplitude, frequency), and/or  hand-eye coordination tests  that measure motor steadiness.

Physiological tests of tremor 
Four studies performed physiological tests of  postural tremor  by means of an accelerometer; three ( ;  ;  ) used identical instruments (i.e. Catsys tremor pen). In addition to using an accelerometer, the fourth study  also evaluated  postural tremor  in formerly exposed workers using a force transducer.

Exposure effects 
On accelerometry, tremor amplitude was significantly decreased in the Low Exposure cohort workers compared to controls , but no significant differences were found between exposed and controls in two High Exposure cohorts ( ;  ) or in the <BEI cohort . Tremor frequency was evaluated in two of the studies; no significant differences were observed ( ;  ).
On tests of  postural tremor  using a force transducer,   found no significant differences between formerly exposed workers and controls for any of five parameters tested (data not shown). Two of those five null findings (‘percentage of total power’ and ‘mean tremor frequency’) had been the ‘parameter most affected’  and ‘the singularly most powerful result’ in their studies of currently-exposed mercury workers ( ;  ;  ).

Dose-effects 
Three of the four studies evaluated the dose-relatedness of postural tremor measured using accelerometry. Two tested associations between one or more NB tremor parameters (e.g. amplitude, frequency, ‘percentage of total power’) and cumulative U Hg  and peak U Hg  ( ;  ), average U Hg  , and duration of exposure ( ;  ). Statistically significant dose-effects were found for only one tremor parameter, amplitude, which correlated significantly with duration of exposure in one study  and with several peak U Hg  metrics (i.e. highest ever peak, number of peaks >600 μg/L) in another . The third study  found no association between amplitude and mean, cumulative or peak levels of Air Hg .
 found no evidence of dose-relatedness for  postural tremor  tested by force transducer in comparisons between subjects with one or more peak U Hg  >600 μg/L and those without such peaks (data not shown).

Hand-eye coordination tests of tremor 
All six studies employed hand-eye coordination tests of motor steadiness. Five used computer-based tests: two used tests of static steadiness ( ;  ), and four assessed tracking ( ;  ;  ;  ). The sixth study  used pencil and paper tests to assess tracking and aiming. Three used non-computerized tests that involved drawing of visually presented materials, i.e. Bender visual-motor gestalt test (BGT) , and Benton visual retention test (B-VRT) ( ;  ). The results of static steadiness, aiming, and tracking/drawing tests have been used to classify tremor respectively as postural, intention, or kinetic ( ; ;  ;  ;  ;  ).

Exposure effects 
Tests of  postural tremor  were null in two studies ( ;  ). One of those studies yielded paradoxical results: exposed workers performed significantly better on tests of static steadiness than controls .  Intention tremor  was assessed in one study: High Exposure cohort workers performed significantly worse on tests of aiming than controls .  Kinetic tremor  was assessed in all six studies; significant results were reported in three.   found that Low Exposure cohort workers performed significantly worse than controls on tests of drawing (i.e. B-VRT), but did not differ on tests of tracking. Significant results were also found in two of the three High Exposure cohorts tested on tracking ( ;  ).

Dose-effects 
Five of the six studies evaluated the dose-relatedness of their findings;   did not. No significant associations were seen between  postural tremor  and the highest tertiles of cumulative U Hg , average U Hg , or duration of exposure .   found that  intention tremor  was significantly associated with job exposure categories and duration of exposure. All five cohorts examined the dose-relatedness of  kinetic tremor ; significant associations were found in all but the Low Exposure cohort. All three High Exposure cohorts found that poorer performance on tests of tracking was significantly associated with cumulative U Hg  ( ;  ), highest peak U Hg , average U Hg , and duration of exposure , and job exposure categories . In the Medium Exposure cohort,   found no evidence of dose-relatedness for kinetic tremor assessed on tests of tracking, however, poorer performance on drawing tests was significantly associated with the highest tertiles of cumulative U Hg  (i.e. cumulative > 600 μg/L), average U Hg , and duration of exposure. In the Low Exposure cohort,   found no association between tests of tracking and mean, cumulative or peak levels of Air Hg .

Motor function 
Motor function (other than steadiness) was assessed in all six cohorts using tests of manual dexterity, motor speed, and grip strength.

Exposure effects 
Manual dexterity was assessed in all six cohorts; significant results were found in three. Performance on Grooved Pegboard (or a similar instrument) was significantly worse in the Low Exposure cohort , the Medium Exposure cohort  and one High Exposure cohort  compared to controls.   noted that workers with deficits of dexterity were the same ones that had abnormal MC on PE: ‘poorer performance on this test [grooved pegboard] among the exposed workers is in accordance with the observation of impaired coordination in the clinical neurological examination of the same workers.’
Motor speed was assessed in four cohorts using tests of finger tapping; significant results were reported in two. Significantly reduced motor speed was found in one Low Exposure cohort  and one High Exposure cohort , but not in the other High Exposure cohort  or in the <BEI cohort .
Grip strength was assessed in four cohorts (3 High Exposure and 1 Low Exposure) using a hand dynamometer.   and   evaluated both hands; Kishi reported scores for ‘right’ and ‘left’ hands separately, but Letz reported only a single test score.   evaluated only the ‘dominant’ hand . Significant differences between exposed and controls were found in only one study:   reported significantly reduced grip strength in both hands of High Exposure cohort workers compared to matched controls.

Dose effects 
Four of the six studies evaluated the dose-relatedness of manual dexterity and motor speed; all reported significant results in the expected direction. Deficits in manual dexterity were significantly associated with a variety of dose and exposure metrics in three studies ( ;  ;  ), but not the fourth . Reduced motor speed was significantly associated with job exposure categories and exposure duration in a High Exposure cohort , but showed no association with mean, cumulative or peak air Hg levels in the Low Exposure cohort . No evidence of dose-related grip strength was found in the three studies that assessed its dose-relatedness ( ;  ;  ).

Motor accuracy 
Motor accuracy was assessed in all six cohorts using tests of attention and response speed (Simple Reaction Time (SRT), and Continuous Performance Tests (CPT)) and perceptual motor speed (Symbol Digit/Digit Symbol (SD)) .

Exposure effects 
Significant results were reported in only one of the six studies that assessed attention and response speed.   found significantly slower SRT in High Exposure cohort workers compared to controls. By contrast, the remaining five studies found no significant differences for SRT. Findings were null in two studies that also tested CPT ( ;  ).
Five studies assessed perceptual motor speed; no significant differences were found between formerly exposed workers and controls on SD tests.   did not perform SD testing.

Dose effects 
The dose-relatedness of perceptual motor speed, attention and response time was evaluated in four of the six studies. Four assessed dose-relatedness of attention and response speed; significant results were reported in only one.   found slower SRT significantly associated with job exposure categories and duration of exposure. Only one of three studies found evidence of dose-relatedness of perceptual motor speed. In the Ellingsen cohort,   found that worse performance on Digit Symbol testing was significantly associated with only one of three dose/exposure metrics tested.

Balance 
Balance was evaluated in three studies: two assessed postural sway ( ;  ); and one evaluated ‘equilibrium duration’.

Exposure effects 
No significant differences were found between formerly exposed workers and controls.

Dose effects 
Two of the three studies evaluated the dose-relatedness of balance; both reported null results. Poorer performance on tests of postural sway showed no association with mean, cumulative or peak levels of Air Hg  . Likewise,   found no significant associations between ‘equilibrium duration’ and job exposure categories or duration of exposure.

Sensory function 
Sensory function (other than color vision) was quantitatively evaluated in three cohorts. Three studies measured vibrotactile thresholds (of fingers and great toe) using vibrometers; two ( ;  ) used identical instruments.

Exposure effects 
 found that Low Exposure cohort workers performed significantly worse than controls for both upper and lower limbs. By contrast, studies of two High Exposure cohorts found no significant differences in vibrotactile thresholds between exposed workers and controls ( ;  ).   also found no significant differences on tests of two-point discrimination or touch-pressure.

Dose effects 
Two of the three studies evaluated the dose-relatedness of their sensory findings.   found no association between vibrotactile thresholds and mean, cumulative or peak levels of Air Hg .   reported inconsistent findings for quantitative testing of two-point discrimination (significant dose-response for hands (p=0.04) but not feet (p=0.65)), touch-pressure (significant dose-response for feet (p=0.01) but not hands (p=0.33)), and vibrotactile threshold (significant dose-response for feet (p=0.01) but not hands (p=0.33)).

Color vision 
Color vision was evaluated in one cohort;   found no statistically significant differences between exposed workers and controls evaluated using the Color Confusion Index (CCI).

Dose effects 
 found no significant dose-relatedness between poorer performance on CCI and mean, cumulative or peak levels of Air Hg .

Electrophysiological testing 
EPS, using electromyography and surface electrodes, were performed in four of the six cohorts. In all four, nerve conduction studies (NCS) were used to evaluate responses to electrical stimulation of peripheral nerves. One cohort was also examined using evoked potentials (EPs) to evaluate the electrical activity of the central nervous system. In the Ellingsen  and Albers  cohorts, NCS testing was performed on the ‘right’ side of the body;   and   did not specify such details. In the Ellingsen cohort,   performed bilateral testing of EPs and reported results separately for the ‘right’ and ‘left’ side outcomes. Statistical analyses were used to evaluate differences between exposed and non-exposed controls and to identify significant associations between test performance and historical measures of exposure and dose. All studies analyzed differences between group mean values of test results, while one study  also reported the number of individuals with pathological findings on NCS (i.e. >2 standard deviations (SD) from mean values of control group) or EPs (i.e. >3 SDs from mean values of control group).   presents summary results for NCS and visual evoked potentials (VEPs). Detailed results for specific tests and for dose-response analyses performed in individual studies are available in  .
Overview of occupational cohort studies that evaluated the association between previous exposure to elemental mercury vapor and two types of electrophysiological outcomes (NCS, and VEPs). Studies are listed top to bottom by decreasing group mean UHg values (μg/L), and category of exposure is denoted (h = high, m = medium, l = low). Abbreviations: AMP: amplitude; LAT: latency; LR: late responses (F-wave latencies); NCS: nerve conduction studies; NCV: nerve conduction velocity; VEPs: visual evoked potentials. *UHg value was converted to μg/L from units originally reported in study, as detailed in  . †Approximation of group mean, based on UHg levels from 78 workers.

Nerve conduction studies 
NCS were performed in four studies that each assessed a variety of motor and/or sensory functions in up to five different nerves and up to four different parameters, yielding 25 unique combinations (e.g. ‘ulnar sensory latency’); results were reported for a total of 49 outcomes. Nerve conduction velocity (NCV) and amplitude were the most frequently evaluated parameters (15 outcomes each), followed by distal latency (11 outcomes) and F-wave latency (8 outcomes).

Exposure effects 
Comparisons of exposed workers and controls revealed only one significant abnormality in the expected direction. In High Exposure cohort workers,   reported a statistically significant slowing of ulnar motor NCV, while slowing of peroneal motor NCV approached significance (0.05<p<0.10). In the other High Exposure cohort,   found no group differences using a Mann-Whitney U test or by analysis of covariance that included age, height, weight, finger volume, and a history of lead exposure.
By contrast, the remaining two cohorts found paradoxically faster NCV in exposed workers.   found that exposed workers had significantly faster NCV than controls for peroneal motor NCV (p<0.02) and for a composite measure of NCV that included ulnar motor NCV (p<0.03).   also found that exposed workers had faster NCV in three of four nerves tested, but these results were not statistically significant. In addition, they found a non-significant increase in the proportion of controls with ‘pathological’ deficits on three of six NCS outcomes as compared to the exposed workers.

Dose-effects 
All studies that performed NCS also assessed the dose-relatedness of their findings. Of 25 unique outcomes (e.g. median sensory NCV) evaluated in one or more studies, seven were significantly associated with historical urine and/or air Hg metrics. However, only one (ulnar motor NCV) was significantly dose-related in more than one study.
 found a significant association between slowing of proximal ulnar motor NCV and cumulative Air Hg , while slowing of distal ulnar sensory NCV was significantly associated with estimates of cumulative and peak Air Hg , but not average Air Hg .
In the Ellingsen cohort, the dose-relatedness of NCS was evaluated using two approaches. In one,   tested the associations between 14 NCS outcomes and two categorical measures of exposure/dose. Workers with cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L had statistically significantly slower median nerve NCV (motor and sensory) compared to controls, but no other differences were seen. Workers with peak U Hg  >300 μg/L showed no significant differences from controls on any of the 14 NCS outcomes tested. In the other,   evaluated correlations between eight selected NCS outcomes and three continuous measures of historical exposure/dose (cumulative U Hg , cumulative Air Hg , number of peak U Hg  >200 μg/L) using MLR analyses that included age and current U Hg  and B Hg  levels. Two NCS outcomes were significantly correlated with one or more measures of exposure/dose: sural sensory amplitude with cumulative U Hg  and peak U Hg  >200 μg/L, and median sensory NCV with cumulative Air Hg .
MLR analyses were also used to evaluate the influence of current consumption of alcohol or smoking on NCS outcomes. Slowing of median motor nerve NCV was significantly associated with increasing consumption of alcohol (p=0.02), while smoking had no effect on NCS outcomes.
In the   cohort, dose effects were evaluated in two ways. First, MLR analyses were used to assess correlations between 14 NCS outcomes and two historical dose metrics. A significant association was seen between median sensory latency and highest peak U Hg , but not cumulative U Hg . Highest peak U Hg  was also significantly correlated with the ‘total number’ of motor nerve abnormalities. Next, using analysis of covariance, workers with peak U Hg  >600 μg/L had significantly prolonged median sensory latency and borderline slowing of ulnar motor NCV compared to those without such peaks plus unexposed controls. Comparisons of workers with two or more U Hg  peaks >600 μg/L vs. all other subjects found significant increases in the total number of abnormalities in motor (p=0.005) and sensory (p=0.04) nerves.
In the   cohort, MLR analyses were performed to evaluate correlations between three ‘selected’ NCS outcomes (ulnar and peroneal motor NCV, and peroneal F-wave latency) and three historical dose/exposure metrics. Slowing of ulnar motor NCV was significantly correlated with higher levels of cumulative U Hg , peak U Hg , and increasing exposure duration. Prolonged F-wave latency in the peroneal nerve was significantly correlated with higher cumulative U Hg  and approached significance for peak U Hg  (0.05<p<0.10). Associations between peroneal NCV and exposure approached significance for cumulative and peak U Hg  (0.05<p<0.10).

Evoked potentials 
EP responses (visual [VEP], brainstem [BEP] and somatosensory [SEP]) were studied in only the Medium Exposure cohort .

Exposure effects 
No significant differences were seen for either VEP (n=10 results) or BEP (n=8 results) between exposed workers and controls, while one of 10 SEP results was paradoxically better in the exposed. There were ‘few subjects’ with pathological findings (details not provided).

Dose-effects 
The dose-relatedness of EPs was evaluated using two approaches. In one,   evaluated the relationship between all three types of EP responses and exposure intensity. Of 56 comparisons performed (i.e. 28 EP results for each of two dose metrics), significant differences between controls and exposed workers were seen for only three: workers with peak U Hg  >300 μg/L had significantly prolonged N75 latency in VEP bilaterally, while workers with cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L had significantly reduced distal NCV in SEP unilaterally. No significant differences were seen for BEP responses.
In the other approach,   evaluated correlations between four VEP responses (latency and amplitude, bilaterally) and three dose/exposure metrics (cumulative air Hg , cumulative U Hg , and the number of U Hg  peaks >200 μg/L). Of twelve possible correlations, only one, the association between prolonged N75 latency in the right eye and the number of peak U Hg  >200 μg/L, was statistically significant.

Peripheral neuropathy 

Exposure effects 
The relationship between mercury exposure and ‘peripheral neuropathy’ (PN) or ‘polyneuropathy’ was evaluated in four of the cohorts. In the Low Exposure cohort,   ‘found little evidence of peripheral neuropathy’; their diagnostic criteria were not described. In the Medium Exposure cohort,   defined ‘polyneuropathy’ as symmetrically decreased deep tendon reflexes in the legs  plus  reduced distal limb sensation and/or muscular wasting with distal paresis; by that definition, none of the subjects had polyneuropathy.
In one of the High Exposure cohorts,   evaluated subjects for ‘polyneuropathy’ on PE, but diagnostic criteria were not described. Paradoxically, the prevalence of clinical polyneuropathy was higher in non-exposed controls than in exposed subjects: 7.8% vs. 5.5%, respectively .
In the other High Exposure cohort,   proposed four alternative criteria for ‘peripheral neuropathy’ based on combinations of nerve conduction and functional test abnormalities (e.g. proprioception of the great toe, Achilles tendon reflex, vibrotactile threshold, and sway speed). PN was significantly correlated with exposure status (i.e. ‘exposed vs. unexposed’), however prevalence rates of PN were not reported.

Dose effects 
Based on PE,   categorized exposed workers as ‘normal’, ‘equivocal’, or ‘polyneuropathy’ (criteria not described) and further stratified them based on peak U Hg  levels: <450 μg/L; 450-699 μg/L; 700-850 μg/L; and >850 μg/L. Using MLR analyses that adjusted for potential confounding factors including age, diabetes mellitus, and ‘reported drinking problems’, the prevalence of polyneuropathy was significantly increased only in workers with peaks >850 μg/L.
A separate analysis compared historical dose metrics in exposed workers with and without PE evidence of polyneuropathy. Workers with ‘clinical polyneuropathy’ had significantly higher peak U Hg  levels than normal subjects (885 μg/L vs. 600 μg/L), but no significant differences were found for other dose/exposure metrics (i.e. number of U Hg  peaks >300 or >600 μg/L, average U Hg , and exposure duration) .
, using stepwise regression that controlled for age, found that associations of PN with cumulative U Hg  approached significance (0.05<p<0.10), while highest peak U Hg  and exposure duration were not significantly associated.

Age-by-exposure interactions 
Interactions between mercury exposure and age were examined in four of the six previous-exposure cohorts; significant results were found in two High Exposure studies.
In the Albers cohort ( ;  ) age-by-exposure interactions were evaluated for selected outcomes. Significant interactions between age and cumulative U Hg  were reported for six outcomes: proximal and distal strength on PE, tremor amplitude (assessed two ways), and quantitative measures of touch-pressure sensation (foot) and vibration sensation (foot). Significant interactions between age and highest peak U Hg  for those six outcomes plus three others (two-point discrimination in hand and foot, and motor nerve abnormalities) were also seen. No evidence of age-by-exposure interactions was found on analyses of several other outcomes including polyneuropathy on PE, sensory nerve abnormalities, and NB tests of tracking, dexterity, or reaction time.
 evaluated interactions between age and ‘a history of mercury intoxication’ on NB outcomes. Significant findings were reported for aiming (left, but not right hand) and manual dexterity, but no such interactions were found on tests of tracking, reaction time, or motor speed (tapping). Likewise no interactions were found for quantitative tests of balance and grip strength.
Age-by-exposure interactions were not found in two other studies.   found no such interaction for tremor amplitude, or for any of the other ‘primary outcomes’ evaluated: peroneal motor NCV; peroneal motor F-wave latency; ulnar motor NCV; hand-eye coordination (i.e. tests of tracking); and diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy. Likewise,   found no evidence of an interaction between age and exposure based on comparisons of NB test scores in workers tested during active exposure and then retested five years after exposure cessation. During the interval between evaluations, performance on several NB tests of motor function decreased significantly in both exposed and control workers, but the magnitude of change in test scores was similar in both groups.

Comparison of neurological findings in current- vs. previous-exposure studies 
In this section, we compare the neurological findings reported in the previous-exposure studies with those findings in current-exposure studies that were reported most consistently and also showed evidence of dose-relatedness, as described in the systematic review by Fields et al. (in press). Results are presented below for each type of neurological evaluation (PE, NB testing, and EPS).
Physical examination
In the studies of currently-exposed workers, a variety of abnormal neurological findings were reported. Most were seen almost exclusively in High Exposure studies. Tremor, impaired MC, and abnormal DTRs were reported most frequently, described in 78%, 39%, and 50% of the High Exposure studies, respectively. Evidence of dose-relatedness was seen for each. Impaired sensation was described less often (22% of the High Exposure studies), but also demonstrated dose-relatedness.
By contrast, none of the five previous-exposure cohorts evaluated on PE had statistically significant increases in tremor or abnormal DTRs in comparisons of exposed workers and controls, and only one showed a significant increase in impaired MC. Reduced sensation, found in three of the five cohorts, was the only significant effect reported with consistency among the previous-exposure cohorts. However, the meaning of that finding is unclear. As previously described, in two of those cohorts (Albers, Ellingsen), the findings of reduced distal sensation were ‘complicated’ by associations with factors unrelated to mercury exposure. Moreover,   also noted that findings of ‘slightly reduced distal sensation’were not associated with tremor, the most widely recognized neurological effect of mercury exposure. Accordingly, the association between reduced sensation and previous exposure to mercury remains uncertain.   contrasts the PE findings in the previous-exposure studies and the corresponding findings reported in current-exposure studies with similar exposure levels that evaluated those functions.
Table 2
KEY:
On the other hand, the absence of increased tremor, impaired MC and abnormal DTRs in direct comparisons of exposed and control groups in the previously-exposed studies, even among the High Exposure cohorts, is not surprising. Results from our analyses in currently-exposed workers indicated that the point prevalence rates for each of these findings did not exceed the corresponding rates found in controls until group mean U Hg  levels were >275 μg/L. As such, we would expect to find significant increases in the prevalence of these PE abnormalities only among subgroups of the most highly exposed workers, as was seen on the dose-related analyses performed in three previous-exposure cohorts (Ellingsen, Albers, and Hokkaido). Significant increases related to exposure status (i.e. exposed vs. controls) would only have been expected in the Hokkaido cohort, where historical group mean U Hg  was >500 μg/L. However, the point prevalence in the former Hokkaido miners was much lower than the corresponding prevalence averaged across studies of currently-exposed workers with similar U Hg  levels (i.e. ≥500 μg/L) for tremor (8.4% vs. 42.3%), abnormal MC (1.2% vs. 28.5%), and abnormal DTRs (4.8% vs. 35.8%). It is particularly striking that the point prevalence in those previously-exposed workers was 5- to 24-fold lower than in the currently-exposed workers who were on average 20 years younger, because neurological findings are expected to be more prevalent as age increases. Such findings support the likelihood that the abnormalities improved after removal from exposure.
Taken together, the data from the current- and previous-exposure studies provide little evidence that clinically detectable neurological effects of mercury vapor exposure persist following cessation of exposure.
Neurobehavioral testing
In the studies of currently-exposed workers, the most consistently reported NB outcomes were tremor, poorer performance on tests of dexterity and motor speed, and normal results on tests of perceptual motor speed, attention or reaction time. Dose-relatedness was also seen for NB tremor (all types combined, and for postural and kinetic tremors, but not intention tremor) and for dexterity and motor speed.
A similar pattern of NB outcomes was seen in studies of previously-exposed workers. However, as shown in   and discussed below, differences between studies of currently- and previously-exposed workers were seen for some of the specific outcomes.
Table 3
Table presents summary results for NB tests of tremor (all types combined, and by subtypes) and tests of manual dexterity and motor speed based on comparisons between exposed workers and controls, and summary results from dose-response analyses performed in individual studies.
Abbreviations:  NA = not applicable; NT = not tested

NB tremor 
The studies of currently- and previously-exposed workers both found significant evidence of NB tremor in comparisons of exposure status, but seemingly contradictory differences were seen with respect to the types of tremor observed. In the current-exposure studies, evidence was strongest for postural tremor (11 of 17 studies had significant findings), mixed for intention tremor (4/7), and weakest for kinetic tremor (1/7). By contrast, in the previous-exposure studies, evidence was strongest for kinetic tremor (3/6) and weakest for postural tremor (1/5).
To better understand these differences, we also considered the dose-relatedness of tremor types using three approaches. First, we examined the proportion of studies with significant tremor findings across increasing categories of exposure. Next, we examined the group mean U Hg  levels in studies with significant vs. null findings for tremor. Lastly, we considered data from those individual studies that analyzed dose-response. Summary results of these analyses are presented in   for all tremor combined (‘overall’) and for each tremor type.

Postural Tremor 
A sufficiency of data for postural tremor in the current-exposure studies provided clear dose-relatedness across increasing categories of exposure . In addition, the U Hg  data for postural tremor in current-exposure studies showed strong evidence of dose-relatedness: the weighted average of group mean U Hg  in studies with significant findings was nearly 5-fold higher than that of studies with null results (184 vs. 39 μg/L). Lastly, twelve of the 17 current-exposure studies which evaluated postural tremor also assessed its dose-relatedness. Significant results, found in half of those studies, were seen more frequently with higher exposure: 75% of the four High Exposure cohorts, 50% of the two Medium and 50% of the two Low Exposure cohorts, but only 25% of the four <BEI ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ).
In contrast to the strong evidence of dose-related postural tremor across studies of currently-exposed workers, no consistent evidence of dose-relatedness was seen in the previous-exposure studies . The results of dose-response analyses performed in individual studies (n=4) were only significant in the High Exposure cohorts, but the associations with specific dose metrics differed between those two cohorts (as detailed in  ). Taken together, these data suggest that postural tremor (as detected on NB testing) may persist in highly exposed workers (e.g. those with peak U Hg  >600 μg/L), but would not be expected to persist in workers with lower exposure.

Kinetic tremor 
The number of studies that evaluated kinetic tremor was limited; however evidence for its dose-relatedness was seen in both current- and previous-exposure studies and across all three approaches used to evaluate dose-relatedness . Three of the four (75%) current-exposure studies that performed dose-response analyses reported that deficits on tests of drawing or tracking were dose-related ( ;  ;  ). The findings of kinetic tremor in three of six previous-exposure studies and its apparent dose-relatedness in current- and previous-exposure studies support the possibility that kinetic tremor, as detected on NB testing, can persist following cessation of mercury exposure. These data also suggest that kinetic tremor should not be expected to persist in cohorts of workers with group mean U Hg  <100 μg/L. It is possible that observations based on so few studies are due to chance, but the consistency of the findings argues against that possibility.

Intention Tremor 
The data for intention tremor are less clear. No evidence of dose-related intention tremor was found among the current-exposure studies, including the four studies that performed individual dose-response analyses in five groups of workers ( ;  ;  ;  ) . The only previous-exposure study that evaluated intention tremor found evidence of its dose-relatedness in a High Exposure cohort. Overall, the limited data available for intention tremor from the previous- and current-exposure studies neither support nor discount the possibility that intention tremor, as detected by NB testing, is a persistent effect of mercury exposure.

Motor function 
Studies of both currently- and previously-exposed workers found significantly poorer performance on tests of dexterity and motor speed in exposed workers compared to controls . These deficits showed consistent evidence of dose-relatedness in the individual dose-response analyses performed in the Medium and High Exposure studies, but only inconsistent evidence in the Low Exposure studies. Overall, these data suggest that deficits in dexterity and motor speed, as detected by NB testing, may persist in some workers with high historical Hg exposures (e.g. peak U Hg  >300 μg/L).

Motor accuracy 
Compared to controls, performance on tests of perceptual motor speed, attention or reaction time was normal in all studies of currently-exposed workers and in all but one of the previous-exposure studies. In the most highly exposed previous-exposure cohort, significant deficits were reported only in reaction time, deficits that were not dose-related . Likewise, no dose-relatedness was found for reaction time in studies of three other previous-exposure cohorts (Albers, Frumkin, Ellingsen). Among ten current-exposure studies that evaluated dose-response, significant results were limited to two: one Low Exposure study that reported significantly slowed reaction time in a subgroup of workers , and one <BEI study that reported a significant positive correlation between duration of exposure and only one of two tests of reaction time  (as detailed in Fields et al., in press).
The sufficiency of data for testing of motor accuracy in the current- and previous-exposure studies (i.e. 38 outcomes tested: 25 tests of attention and response speed; 13 tests of perceptual motor speed) and the lack of significant findings support the conclusion that exposure to elemental Hg is unlikely to adversely affect motor accuracy (i.e. tests which require motor ability as well as other abilities such as correct perception/information processing).

Section summary 
Overall, results of NB testing in current- and previous-exposure studies provide strong evidence for the reversal of postural tremor. On the other hand, the data raise the possibility that kinetic tremor and poorer performance on tests of dexterity and motor speed may persist.
Electrophysiological studies

Nerve conduction studies 
NCS were performed in the High, Medium, and Low Exposure cohorts of currently- and previously-exposed workers. The proportions of current- and previous-exposure cohorts tested by NCS were identical across those exposure categories.
Despite such similarities in testing, as shown in  , there were striking differences seen in the frequencies of statistically significant NCS outcomes documented in the current-exposure studies (24%; 17 of 72 outcomes) vs. the previous-exposure studies (4%; 2 of 49 outcomes).
Table 4
Table presents the percentage and number of statistically signficant NCS outcomes divided by the total number of outcomes evaluated. Results that were not reported, or were parodoxical, were categoried as “null” findings and included in the denominator.
Only one of the two significant findings in previously-exposed workers was in the expected direction. That finding, slowing of ulnar motor NCV, was reported in only one of two High Exposure cohorts tested. The meaningfulness of that particular finding is uncertain, given that no significant differences in ulnar motor NCV were found in the seven studies of currently-exposed workers ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ), including four that were in the High Exposure category.
The other significant finding in previously-exposed workers, a paradoxical one of significantly faster peroneal motor NCV in the Low Exposure cohort , directly contrasts with the findings of slower peroneal motor NCV seen in High Exposure cohorts of previously- and currently-exposed workers (Gilioli et al. 1976; ).
Overall, the inconsistency of the specific NCS findings and the more than 10-fold decrease in the overall frequency of statistically significant findings in previously-exposed workers provides evidence that mercury-related NCS abnormalities are not persistent.

Evoked potentials 
Current-exposure studies found statistically significant differences between exposed workers and controls for VEPs, but not BEPs or SEPs. Significant differences on VEP testing were found only for latency (on 5 of 6 outcomes tested) but not for amplitude (1 of 9 outcomes). By contrast, the only previous-exposure study that evaluated EPs, a Medium Exposure cohort, found no statistically significant differences between workers and controls on tests of VEP, BEP or SEP .

Section summary 
Overall, results of EPS in current- and previous-exposure studies provide no evidence for the persistence of electrophysiological abnormalities.
Discussion
Our systematic review looked for evidence of persistent neurological effects among workers with a broad range of Hg 0  exposures who were examined on average 4.8 to 30 years after the cessation of exposure. Historical average U Hg  levels exceeded currently recommended limits in all but one of the six ‘previous-exposure’ cohorts, and peak U Hg  levels ≥600 μg/L were documented in 16% to ≥ 45% of the workers in the Medium and High Exposure cohorts, respectively. Some workers had U Hg  levels that were extraordinarily high (>3000 μg/L). For perspective, the U Hg  level currently recommended by the ACGIH as a biological exposure limit for healthy workers exposed 40 hours/week for 6 months or longer is 20 μg/g creatinine, equivalent to about 28 μg/L . Thus some of the study subjects had U Hg  levels approximately 20- to 100-fold higher than currently recommended levels.
Despite such exposures, there were few consistent significant findings, seen almost exclusively among the most highly exposed workers. Comparisons of objective neurological outcomes between studies of previously- and currently-exposed workers suggest that deficits on NB tests of tremor, dexterity, and motor speed were most likely to persist, particularly in subsets of highly exposed workers. PE findings of postural tremor and impaired MC may also persist in such workers. In some cases, impaired sensation also seemed to persist. The paucity of neurological effects following previous mercury exposure contrasts with the effects associated with current or recent exposure and lends support to the more general view that ‘exposure-related neurological dysfunction is often reversible, and only rarely is the toxic exposure so massive … that irreversible neuronal changes ensue’ ( ;  ). As discussed below, that possibility is supported by epidemiological data that document the reversibility of Hg 0 -related neurological effects.
Reversibility of effects
Substantial improvement or complete normalization of PE abnormalities has been documented in studies that performed follow-up examinations in selected workers after their removal from exposure.   examined nine of the ‘most severely affected’ workers from an untold number of symptomatic employees of a US thermometer factory. Those nine workers had a mean U Hg  of 1320 μg/24 hrs and abnormal PE findings that included ‘severe’ tremor (n=9), abnormal DTRs (n=2), and ‘broad-based gait’ (n=1). Motor signs were so severe in six of the nine that ‘eating, drinking, and dressing were performed with great difficulty and two … had virtually stopped walking because of unsteadiness’. Improvement in motor function was characterized as ‘good’ to ‘excellent’ after removal from exposure (17-20 months) in eight workers, most of whom had also been treated with the heavy metal chelating agent, British Anti-Lewisite (n=7), and ‘poor’ in one worker followed only 13 months, and noted to have had ‘the most severe over-all deficit’. That last worker had recovered from the ‘overt’ motor signs and tremor, but was judged ‘poor’ based on his performance on tests of tapping.
Gonzalez-Fernandez et al. (1984) examined five workers employed 5 to 7 years in a small workplace that manufactured Hg relays; mean U Hg  levels averaged 446 μg/L and ranged up to 1100 μg/L during the 10 months prior to PE. Tremor and abnormal MC were seen in all five workers and nystagmus in four. Removal from exposure (2 months) and chelation treatment (multiple oral doses of N-acetyl-DL-penicillamine) was associated with ‘rapid improvement’ of motor signs in all five workers.
Normalization of PE findings has also been observed in workers removed from exposure who did not receive chelation treatment.   and   performed follow-up examinations in 12 workers four to six months after cessation of exposure. Workers were selected on the basis of having the highest blood and/or urine mercury levels during the initial assessment of 32 chloralkali workers. Five of the 12 had cerebellar abnormalities (i.e. intention tremor and/or dysdiadochokinesia). Normalization of cerebellar signs was seen in four workers with an initial group mean U Hg  of 426 μg/L (range: 205-670) and retest mean U Hg  of 65 μg/L (range: 32 -108), but persisted in the fifth worker who had higher U Hg  levels (initial: 790 μg/L, retest: 412 μg/L).
 performed follow-up evaluations of five workers employed for years in the repair of direct-current meters who had been diagnosed with ‘chronic mercury poisoning’. Four of the five had ‘coarse irregular tremors’ that resolved in three within a year of removal from exposure. At the time of diagnosis, the three had 24-hr U Hg  levels of 1495-3900 μg. Tremor persisted in the fourth worker whose initial 24-hr U Hg  level was 7950 μg, and who had been re-exposed to mercury. The fifth worker complained of intermittent tremor, but tremor was not documented on examination.   illustrates the improvement documented 12 months after exposure cessation in Bidstrup's case 1, whose initial 24-hr U Hg  was 1495 μg.
Improvement of tremor following cessation of exposure.
Improvement of abnormal DTRs and impaired sensation has also been documented.   described a worker who developed hyperactive DTRs, intention tremor, fasciculations, and reduced vibratory sensation after spending two days salvaging liquid Hg from industrial grade thermometers. Urine Hg, first collected 3 ½ months after the exposure incident, was 98.75 μg/L. On follow-up examination performed about 5 ½ months after the exposure incident, his neurological findings ‘were completely normal’.
Follow-up data in the   and   and   studies document a similar pattern of improvement. Persistent effects were rare, and only observed in workers who had very high U Hg  levels. By contrast, most Hg 0 -related PE abnormalities resolved following removal from exposure. Although these findings were based on small numbers of observations, and might have been due to chance, similar results were reported in the largest study that assessed neurological effects in previously-exposed workers. In that study,   compared PE findings of tremor in 228 exposed workers and 236 controls. No significant increase in tremor prevalence was seen in the previously-exposed workers overall, but tremor prevalence was significantly increased in those with one or more peak U Hg  >600 μg/L; the proportion with persistent tremor increased as the number of samples with U Hg  >600 increased.
Significant improvements in performance on NB tests of postural tremor, dexterity, and tapping have also been documented in studies that performed follow-up testing in selected workers after exposure was reduced or stopped.   reported statistically significant improvements on tests of dexterity in 32 workers retested 4-6 months after exposure was reduced from a mean U Hg  of 599 to 292 μg/L. In addition, motor speed in 11 workers was significantly improved 4-6 months after removal from exposure (mean U Hg  levels fell from 596 to 95 μg/L). Similarly,   documented improved tapping scores in four of five workers retested 6-10 months after removal from exposure (mean U Hg  fell from 660 to 200 μg/L). Both studies also reported significant improvements in postural tremor on follow-up testing of subsets of workers, based on changes in tremor parameters measured using physiological techniques.

Functional significance of persistent effects 
Given that some mercury-related neurological effects may persist long after exposure cessation, we sought to understand the functional significance of those PE effects most likely to be the consequence of Hg exposure (i.e. tremor impaired MC, and DTRs). Only two of the previous-exposure cohorts, Albers and Ellingsen, provided perspective on this question. They were the only cohorts with statistically significant, persistent PE findings of tremor (in high-dose workers only) and impaired MC. Both studies also reported significantly reduced sensation on PE, and significant deficits on NB tests of tremor and manual dexterity.
In the Albers cohort,   observed that ‘many of the measures examined indicate decreasing performance but not necessarily of impairment’. That distinction was not defined or further discussed. In the Ellingsen cohort,   concluded that abnormalities on PE were ‘slight’ and ‘in nearly all cases cannot be classified as disease’. They specifically observed that ‘postural tremor did in most cases not interfere with the subjects [ sic ] daily activities’.
Similar observations were noted in the current-exposure studies. As detailed in Fields et al. (in press), five of the six studies that explicitly commented on the clinical and/or functional significance of their findings (from among the 46 studies that performed PE) described ‘minor’ or ‘mild’ findings that were ‘clinically insignificant’. Among these were two High Exposure studies that specifically noted the absence of functionally significant effects ( ;  ). The only current-exposure study that described functionally significant abnormalities on PE was one that had ‘selected’ workers based on the severity of their symptoms (Vroom et al. 1972).
Together, these limited observations provide perspective on the reversibility of mercury-related abnormalities, but they do not rule out the possibility of residual, functionally-significant deficits. However, as persistent, statistically significant, dose-related PE findings of tremor and impaired MC were reported only in the Ellingsen and Albers cohorts, it seems likely that functionally significant findings would be seen only following very high doses and peak exposures. Accordingly, we next considered the exposure/dose levels most closely associated with persistent effects.

Exposure/dose levels associated with persistent effects 
Although none of the previous-exposure studies found statistically significant increases in tremor prevalence on PE in comparisons between exposed workers and controls, dose-related increases were seen in subsets of highly-exposed workers in three cohorts (Albers, Hokkaido and Ellingsen). The dose levels reported for those three cohorts suggest that PE tremor persisted only in workers with peak U Hg  levels ≥500 μg/L. In the Albers cohort, the critical dose measure associated with persistent postural tremor was peak U Hg  >600 μg/L. In the Hokkaido cohort, tremor increased two-fold in workers with ‘mercury poisoning’, of whom 95% had U Hg  >500 μg/L (with a range up to >2000 μg/L). In the Ellingsen cohort, the dose-relatedness with peak U Hg  is less clear:   documented postural tremor in 14 of 77 workers and peak U Hg  levels >600 μg/L in 12 of 77 workers. Although they did not specifically discuss the association between tremor and peak U Hg , they did note that their findings were ‘in agreement with’ Albers, who reported ‘increased prevalence of tremor … among the highest exposed subjects’ ( , p. 743). PE findings of impaired coordination and reduced sensation showed similar dose-related effects in the Albers and Ellingsen cohorts.
The dose levels associated with deficits on NB tests of tremor, dexterity, and motor speed were also similar to those seen for PE abnormalities. In the Albers cohort, poorer performance on tests of postural tremor and dexterity were attributed to historical peak U Hg  >600 μg/L: ‘a residual effect of the higher mercury exposure in the 1950's … those who had at least one mercury urine value above 0.6 mg/L’ (Kallenbach et al). In the Hokkaido cohort, increased prevalence of deficits on NB tests of intention tremor, kinetic tremor, and motor speed were seen in workers with the highest levels of exposure (e.g. U Hg  ≥ 500 μg/L). In the Ellingsen cohort, deficits on NB tests of kinetic tremor and dexterity were significantly associated with cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L, and average U Hg  >110 μg/L . It is notable that peak U Hg  levels were >600 μg/L in 12 and >300 μg/L in 28 of 77 workers, but associations between peak U Hg  levels and NB test results were not reported. However, workers with peak U Hg  >300 μg/L comprised 69% (18 of 28) of the workers with cumulative U Hg  >600 μg/L . Similar dose-relatedness between quantitative tests of sensation and peak U Hg  >600 μg/L was seen in the Albers cohort.
Two other cohorts reported dose-relatedness for NB tremor (Letz cohort) and tests of dexterity (Frumkin cohort), but did not indicate the specific levels associated with persistent effects.

Section summary 
The reported findings of reversibility and dose-response indicate that residual neurological effects, particularly persistent tremor and impaired coordination on PE, can be found mainly in subsets of the most heavily exposed workers, particularly after very high peak exposures. That finding is consistent with Kallenbach's conclusions about the Albers cohort: ‘With reference to the large majority of the 222 exposed workers that were studied, there is no evidence to suggest that there were significant residual mercury-related tremor effects. It is probable that approximately five to ten of the most heavily exposed workers have a residual tremor related to their mercury exposure’ ( , p. 187).
The possibility of persistent NB effects after less extreme exposures is suggested by findings in the Ellingsen and Frumkin cohorts, although neither provided sufficient exposure data to affirm that possibility, and their findings of persistence were inconsistent with results reported for the High Dose cohorts of Albers and Letz. It seems contrary to expectations that persistent effects would be manifested in lower dose, but not higher dose cohorts.
One possible explanation for such inconsistency involves the adequacy of the exposure and dose-response assessments as described in those two cohorts. A sizeable proportion of the Ellingsen workers had peak exposures that were very high; it is tempting to attribute the observed deficits to such exposures. Unfortunately, the available data do not allow us to test that hypothesis. As for the Frumkin study, it is likely that workers' exposures were underestimated. As described above, exposures were estimated using a JEM based on air levels obtained during three years when exposure levels were unusually low. In addition, a NIOSH plant survey during the time studied by Frumkin reported a mean U Hg  level nearly three-fold greater than that reported by Frumkin; 41% of the workers had mean U Hg  levels >600 μg/g creatinine . Thus we cautiously propose that the results of the Ellingsen and Frumkin cohorts also support the view that effects persist only following very high peak exposures.
Age-by-exposure interaction
The possibility of an interaction between age and exposure level was initially raised by   and  . They proposed that aging, which reduces the capacity of compensatory mechanisms, might unmask prior subclinical neurotoxic damage in some individuals as a ‘consequence of age-related neuronal attrition’ ( , p. 659). They also suggested that their hypothesis that manifestations of Hg 0 -induced neurotoxicity might be delayed until aging supervened ‘could be tested in a longitudinal study … if the aging/unmasking hypothesis is true, then then exposure group over subsequent years should show an increased incidence of abnormal tremor compared to the control group’ ( , p. 182).
We are aware of only two previous-exposure studies that provide such longitudinal perspectives.  , a follow-up study of the Albers cohort, found that ‘contrary to the results of the previous investigation, no age by exposure interaction was observed in the current study’. In the second study,   found no evidence of age-exposure interactions in <BEI Exposure workers who underwent NB testing during active exposure and then five years after exposure ceased. If there were a positive age-by-exposure interaction, it would more likely have been seen in the High Exposure than <BEI workers; among the latter, abnormal effects were neither expected nor observed. Accordingly, the very limited empirical data provides no evidence that Hg 0 -related neurotoxicity is unmasked by aging, but additional studies are necessary to clarify this issue.
Implications of these results
The findings of our analysis have potentially important implications for the clinical assessment and care of formerly-exposed mercury workers and others with persistent or late-onset neurological deficits. It is our experience that historical Hg 0  exposure is often listed prominently among the likely disease etiologies for such patients, especially those who initially present with postural tremor or impaired MC on PE. While such an association is possible, it seems increasingly unlikely the more distant in time and less extreme the level of exposure. The risk of too readily ascribing such residual effects to previous Hg 0  exposure is that more likely and potentially more treatable causes of impairment may be ignored. Accordingly, consideration of historical Hg 0  exposures as the cause of persistent neurological impairment requires that the nature and intensity of exposure be documented as carefully as possible. In the absence of a history of prolonged or extreme Hg 0  exposures, other causes of neurological dysfunction should be rigorously pursued. Individual evaluations should be performed on a case-by-case basis considering individual factors, exposure history and medical history. Because the findings of this review derived predominantly from group-level data, their extrapolation to the clinical care of individuals should be made with caution.
Likewise, there is no evidence that Hg 0 -related neurotoxicity manifests itself only later in life after exposure has ended. To the contrary, our review indicates that following exposure cessation, such neurotoxicity improves or normalizes over time. Thus the onset of neurological deficits years after removal from exposure should not be readily attributed to Hg 0  exposure. Such attributions can also lead to the failure to diagnose more likely, treatable conditions.
Limitations of this systematic review
The main limitation of the present review is the lack of longitudinal studies that could directly inform whether Hg 0 -related neurological effects are persistent. Lacking such studies we constructed synthetic longitudinal studies, using reports of effects in currently-exposed workers to approximate the clinical status that probably would have been observed in the previously-exposed workers if they had been evaluated during exposure. However, that approach is limited by deficiencies of the current-exposure literature. As we have noted elsewhere (Fields et al., in press), those limitations include the failure of several of the older studies to describe detailed findings, use specific tests consistently, include matched controls, or perform statistical evaluations.
It also seemed possible that limitations of study quality among the previous-exposure studies might have influenced the findings in the present review. We did not assign these studies to quality tiers, as we had done in our previous review (Fields et al., in press), because the small number of studies under consideration precluded the usefulness of such an approach. Instead, for each of the studies, we described in detail their use of control groups, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and analytical methods used to minimize confounding (Methods section), and provided a transparent way to interpret the meaningfulness of the PE results of the Hokkaido cohort (Results section). We believe that this approach transparently provides the same information, but with even greater detail than using the summary tiers. However, had we assigned quality tiers, each of these studies would have been in the highest tier (tier 1) except for the Hokkaido cohort, which would have received a tier 1 rating for NB, but a tier 3 rating for PE due to the lack of a control group. Accordingly, we see no basis to suggest that limited study quality affected our present results.
We considered the possibility that the apparent dearth of persistent effects was due to the use of inappropriate control groups in the previous-exposure studies. However, as described in the Methods section, all of those studies had matched controls to exposed workers by age and gender, and noted their comparability with regard to education. In addition, most had excluded workers with other known or suspected confounders and/or adjusted for their impact using statistical models.
Moreover, in the Ellingsen cohort, study authors noted ‘a possible selection towards healthier referents’ because controls had been selected ‘among current employees’ whereas 9% of the exposed workers were not actively working at the time of the study ( , p. 431). In the Hokkaido cohort, Kishi also noted that ‘a higher percentage of referents were currently working than exmercury miners, mainly because many of the referents over 60 years old were farmers’ ( , p. 294). That difference is a likely explanation for the finding of significantly weaker grip strength in exposed workers compared to controls; in a dose-response analysis, stronger grip strength was significantly associated with ‘working or not working’, but not with any of the metrics of mercury exposure. As the selection of ‘healthier’ control groups would have biased results away from the null, we find no evidence to suggest that the lack of abnormal findings on PE in previously-exposed workers could be due to inappropriate control groups used in these studies.
Although the possibility of such limitations cannot be totally excluded, the general paucity of persistent neurological effects on PE and NB testing is striking, especially in light of the magnitude of exposures in some of these cohorts.
Conclusion
Our review of previous-exposure studies finds consistent evidence that Hg 0 -related neurotoxic effects detectable on PE, NB testing, and EPS are substantially reversed over time. To the extent that such effects do persist, they are reported principally in workers who have had very high dose exposures. In addition, based on limited available data, those effects reported to persist have been described as having little or no functional significance.
Supplementary Material
Sup Table 1
Sup Table 2
Sup Table 3
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Ms. J. Rivera for bibliographic excellence. We are very grateful to the four anonymous reviewers selected by the Editor for the value of their comments in improving the manuscript.
Dr. Louis was supported by grant R01 NS094607 from NINDS.
Footnotes
Declaration of interest : Jonathan Borak and Cheryl Fields are employees of Jonathan Borak & Company, which provides consulting services on environmental and occupational health issues (including concerns related to mercury exposure) to government and private clients. Both Ms. Fields and Dr. Borak are part time employees of Yale University. Elan Louis is a full-time employee of Yale University. The authors have not appeared in the last five years in any legal or regulatory proceedings related to the contents of this paper and have no plans to participate in such proceedings in the future. Dr. Borak and Ms. Fields contributed to the research reported in this paper during their normal course of employment without supplementary funding or external support.
Declaration of interest : Jonathan Borak and Cheryl Fields are employees of Jonathan Borak & Company, which provides consulting services on environmental and occupational health issues (including concerns related to mercury exposure) to government and private clients. Both Ms. Fields and Dr. Borak are part time employees of Yale University. Elan Louis is a full-time employee of Yale University. The authors have not appeared in the last five years in any legal or regulatory proceedings related to the contents of this paper and have no plans to participate in such proceedings in the future. Dr. Borak and Ms. Fields contributed to the research reported in this paper during their normal course of employment without supplementary funding or external support.
Contributor Information
Cheryl A. Fields,   Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
Jonathan Borak,   Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology & Public Health, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
Elan D. Louis,   Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, and Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES