Considerations for Addressing Low HIV Testing Rates among Adolescent Men who have Sex with Men
Errol L. Fields
a Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of General Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Baltimore, MD
Travis A. Gayles
b Montgomery County Department of Health and Human Services, Rockville, MD

In “Factors Associated with HIV testing in Teenage Men Who Have Sex with Men” Mustanski et al.  explore individual, family, school and healthcare factors associated with lifetime receipt of an HIV test in a sample of adolescent men who have sex with men (AMSM) (n=699) between ages 13–18. Authors report low testing rates (23.3%) in this sample but found the following factors to be significant predictors of HIV testing: older age, sexual experience, HIV-related information, motivation and behavioral (IMB) skills, and discussions with a doctor about sexual orientation or male partners. Mustanski et al. conclude with important recommendations for pediatricians to improve physician-patient communication about sex and sexuality with adolescent patients.
The individual and practice-level changes suggested by Mustanski et al. are important for pediatric providers and consistent with American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommendations. ,  There are numerous AAP policy statements and clinical reports emphasizing importance of sexual and reproductive health (SRH) services for adolescents as well as specific guidelines for the care of sexual and gender minority youth issued by the AAP ,  and Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine,  yet gaps in SRH care provision persist for these youth.  Pediatricians, and physicians in general, are often undertrained in the care of sexual and gender minority youth;  ,  therefore, more upstream, educational interventions may be necessary to support effective implementation of the authors’ recommended changes. The integration of LGBTQ health curricula in undergraduate, graduate and continuing medical education of pediatric providers is critical to ensuring the pediatric workforce is consistently well equipped to provide culturally competent evidence-based care to sexual and gender minority youth.
As the authors note, young men are often have less primary care engagement compared to young women and may seek HIV testing in community settings.  Indeed, nearly 1/3 of their sample (32.5%) did not have a regular doctor and having a regular doctor was not associated with HIV testing.  Increasing capacity of pediatricians to provide comprehensive SRH services for AMSM who access primary care is critical, but these findings suggest AMSM without a regular doctor require access to testing outside of primary care settings. Non clinic-based testing venues that are highly utilized, accessible and trusted spaces for teens may foster enhanced privacy and facilitate more candid disclosure related to sexual health concerns.  School based health clinics,  health department sexual health clinics,  and community-based organizations –  can all be effective venues to engage AMSM for HIV testing and other SRH services. Testing resources can be paired effectively with peer educators and other evidenced-based outreach and education practices to increase testing rates, and partner with clinical providers to provide treatment, and comprehensive linkage to care resources.  As noted by Mustanski et al., increasing HIV-related IMB skills through outreach and education can also empower students to be more aware of and utilize community resources for HIV testing and preventative services  in addition to requesting testing in clinical encounters with their pediatricians.
The authors noted higher testing rates in Black/African American AMSM, but found no significant associations between race and HIV testing. However, given the significant racial disparities in HIV incidence and prevalence affecting Black/African American MSM,  additional consideration of the factors affecting testing in this racial subgroup is warranted. The higher rates of HIV testing in Black/African American AMSM in this sample is consistent with past studies reporting higher testing rates in Black/African American MSM overall despite higher HIV prevalence in this population. Future studies should stratify racial/ethnic subgroups to identify factors associated with testing in this priority population. In the interim, design of testing and prevention strategies focused on Black/African American AMSM should be mindful of systemic and structural constructs that influence this group’s risk profile, and address unique barriers resulting from the intersectionality of race/ethnicity, age, and sexuality faced by this population.
Finally, while HIV testing is an important first step in the HIV treatment cascade, it is also an important first step in the HIV prevention/pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) cascade. Given the recent FDA approval of PrEP for minors ≥35kg,  it is critical that AMSM at high risk for HIV acquisition, not only have access to routine HIV testing but also access to PrEP and other HIV prevention services. AMSM particularly Black/African American AMSM have had consistently low PrEP uptake relative to their rate of new HIV diagnoses.  While PrEP access and uptake may be beyond the scope of the original paper, many of the strategies and recommendations needed to improve limited access to testing for AMSM are equally need to improve access to PrEP and mitigate HIV acquisition risk in this population.
Understanding discrepancies in adolescent HIV testing practices is a critical component of understanding the larger risk profile of AMSM. This information will further inform efforts to end the epidemic, and revolutionize how pediatricians discuss sexual health, and communicate with adolescent sexual and gender minorities.
Acknowledgments
Funding Source : No funding was secured for this study.
Financial Disclosure : Errol L. Fields has served on a HIV Prevention/PrEP and Treatment Advisory Board for Gilead Sciences.
Abbreviations:
Footnotes
Potential Conflict of Interest : Errol L. Fields has served on a HIV Prevention/PrEP and Treatment Advisory Board for Gilead Sciences.
Potential Conflict of Interest : Errol L. Fields has served on a HIV Prevention/PrEP and Treatment Advisory Board for Gilead Sciences.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES