Young black MSM’s exposures to and discussions about PrEP while navigating geosocial networking apps
Errol L. Fields
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
b Department of Health, Behavior & Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Nicole Thornton
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Amanda Long
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Anthony Morgan
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Mudia Uzzi
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
Renata Arrington Sanders
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
b Department of Health, Behavior & Society, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Jacky M. Jennings
a Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA
c Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Abstract
Young Black gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (YBMSM) carry a disproportionate HIV burden perpetuated by exposure to sexual networks with higher untreated HIV prevalence and incidence. In Baltimore, these sexual networks include high utilization of geosocial networking apps (GSN-apps). Our prior work suggests these apps can be important access points for targeted interventions like PrEP. To inform online PrEP outreach we explored YBMSM GSN-app users’ exposure to and discussions about PrEP while navigating apps. We actively recruited YBMSM (n=17) age 18–24 from the GSN-app most frequently reported by newly diagnosed HIV-infected MSM in Baltimore. Participants were recruited through direct messaging within the GSN-app while logged-on in high HIV transmission areas. Participants completed 60–90 minute semi-structured interviews, which were analyzed using a 3-stage analytic coding strategy. While some participants had not heard of PrEP, the majority described mentions or conversations about PrEP on GSN-apps. Three themes emerged: (1) Mistrust of PrEP, (2) Association with sexual promiscuity, and (3) Concerns about lack of protection from other STIs. Proper messaging, accurate information, and education are needed to account for the negative perceptions that surround PrEP; otherwise, continued underuse among YBMSM will expand rather than reduce HIV disparities.

“I’m learning about this thing that could potentially save my life …off of a sex app” Young Black Gay and Bisexual Men’s Exposure to and Discussions about PrEP while Navigating Geosocial Networking Apps
Introduction
The majority (67%) of all new HIV infections in the United States in 2016 were among gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (MSM), with young Black MSM (YBMSM) bearing a disproportionate burden of disease . If current trends continue, the CDC projects that one in two black MSM (BMSM) are at risk of being diagnosed with HIV in their lifetime . In 2017, BMSM represented 27.8% of new HIV diagnoses in Baltimore . Overall, 37% of those newly diagnosed were under age 29, 81% of newly diagnosed adolescents were Black and YBMSM have an HIV prevalence of 39% ( ;  ).
A growing body of evidence suggests that these disparities are the result of exposure to sexual networks with higher numbers of untreated HIV-positive individuals, rather than a result of YBMSM engaging in risk behaviors at higher rates than other MSM. YBMSM tend to report fewer risk behaviors than other MSM, but they also report lower levels of viral suppression ( ;  ). Black MSM are also less likely than other MSM to know their serostatus and less likely to discuss serostatus with their sexual partners, resulting in a higher number of partners with unknown status ( ;  ). Furthermore, Black MSM often belong to dense racially concordant sexual networks ( ;  ). Membership in these networks, whose members are less likely to be virally suppressed than other MSM, places YBMSM at an elevated risk of contracting HIV, especially in networks with serodiscordant members. Biobehavioral interventions like pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) have the potential to disrupt HIV transmission within these high-risk networks, but their implementation must be culturally tailored to YBMSM.
Usage of geosocial networking (GSN) applications to meet sexual partners is increasingly common among MSM. Internet-based sites have replaced bars and clubs as the most frequently reported sex partner meeting venues in Baltimore ( ;  ). Online venues have been linked to high risk sexual behaviors. The odds of any unprotected anal intercourse and serodiscordant anal intercourse were higher in online encounters among 11 reviewed studies . A systematic review including 25 studies found elevated odds of a chlamydia or gonorrhea diagnosis and a pooled HIV prevalence of 6% among app users . Given their increasing usage as sexual partner meeting venues and their association with sexual risk behaviors, GSN apps represent an important venue to target for PrEP interventions.
Previous research suggests low uptake of PrEP among GSN app users despite many users reporting awareness of PrEP ( ;  ). In one study, most participants recruited from a GSN app reported willingness to use PrEP, but listed concerns about side effects and affordability as barriers . Qualitative interviews have reinforced cost as a barrier to uptake among minority populations, and highlight lack of support within social circles and negative connotations with promiscuity as further barriers to uptake . Nationally, there are racial disparities in PrEP uptake, with only 11% of PrEP users being Black and with white men and women being six times more likely to be prescribed PrEP despite Black men and women representing 40% of the population with PrEP indications . These disparities indicate a need for interventions targeted to high risk YBMSM, who experience a higher risk of HIV infection and are being missed by current PrEP programs. Our prior work has found that GSN apps can be important access points for targeted interventions like PrEP, which can be used to interrupt transmission in high risk networks . Yet PrEP awareness, knowledge and utilization remain low in YBMSM, which may impede online outreach designed to link these young men to PrEP.
The present study aims to inform future online outreach for PrEP among YBMSM GSN app users by exploring, using qualitative methodology, their exposure to and discussions about PrEP while navigating these spaces.
Methods
Study population and design
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 17 YBMSM aged 18–24 years (mean=21.41, SD=2.06) between September 2015 and February 2016. Participant eligibility criteria included: African American or Black by self-report, aged 18–24 years, reported anal/oral sex with a male partner met on a GSN app in the last 12 months, residing in Baltimore City and English speaking.

Participant recruitment and data collection 
We used a purposive sampling strategy to recruit at-risk YBMSM users of a GSN app potentially connected to HIV transmission networks by actively recruiting participants while using an eligible GSN-app within an eligible area (i.e., census tract) or sex partner meeting venue (e.g., bar or club). Participants were recruited while signed on to a selected GSN app in one of two scenarios: 1) within a census tract with a high community viral load (CVL) and predominantly Black/African American residents and 2) attending a sex partner meeting venues characterized as club or bar with a high venue viral load, which was highly nominated by Black/African American MSM. These criteria were selected to prioritize recruiting of YBMSM in high HIV transmission areas. Details of the strategy for selecting GSN apps and areas are described below.

GSN-app Eligibility Criteria 
Using city health department surveillance data, we selected the GSN-app most frequently nominated as a sex partner meeting venue in the past twelve months by newly HIV diagnosed MSM between October 2012 and December 2014 in Baltimore City. A description of this data has been provided previously ( ;  ). Data were limited to cases with interview records and information on at least one nominated sex partner meeting venue. A frequency list of GSN apps was generated and we selected the most frequently reported GSN-app.

Census Tract Eligibility Criteria 
Eligible census tracts selected for recruitment included census tracts with a high CVL and a population of greater than 75% Black/African-American. These methods have been described previously . HIV public health surveillance data from October 2012 to December 2014 was obtained from the city health department including 13,773 HIV-positive individuals. CVL measure was generated by census tract by calculating the geometric mean of all persons with a viral load living in that census tract. Census tracts with a CVL above 1500 copies/mL  were defined as high CVL areas ( ;  ). We identified seven census tracts which met criteria for high CVL and with a population of greater than 75% Black/African-American.

Sex Partner Meeting Venue Eligibility Criteria 
Eligible sex partner meeting venues selected for recruitment included venues with a high venue viral load that were highly nominated among Black/African American gay, bisexual and other MSM. Venue viral load was calculated as the geometric mean viral load of cases that reported meeting a sex partner at a specific venue. Venues with a venue viral load above 1500 copies/mL were defined as high venue viral load venues. We identified three venues that met the criteria for high venue viral load and being highly nominated among Black/African American gay, bisexual and other MSM.

Recruitment Process 
Participants eligible for recruitment were logged onto the selected GSN-app in one of the seven census tracts or one of the three venues. The selected tracts and venues were randomly assigned to the following recruitment time periods based on prior findings about GSN utilization: 10a-2p, 4p-8p, 11p-3a, and 11a-3p . Research assistants (RA) travelled in pairs to the recruiting site (e.g., to the geographic center of the census tract or inside the venue) and logged onto the GSN app using profiles created for the study. These profiles included fliers with study information and eligibility criteria. GSN users self-identifying as Black/African-American and between 18–24 years were sent direct messages within a one-mile radius. Individuals who screened eligible and were interested in the study scheduled a time with the RA for the semi-structured interview.
Two hundred seven individuals were sent a recruitment message. Approximately 1/3 (71) responded to the initial direct message and 86% (n=61) were interested in participating. There were no significant differences with respect to age or time of contact between those who responded and those who did not respond. Of those interested, 66.7% (n=40) completed the eligibility screen; RAs attempted to screen the remaining interested individuals but they did not answer all of the screening questions and stopped responding to messages. 29.5% (n=18) were eligible for the study and 28.3% (n=17) completed the study. Ineligibility was primarily due to age greater than 24 or no sexual activity in the past 12 months.

Data Collection 
A self-identified Black gay research assistant conducted 1–2 hour semi-structured interviews with participants. Interviews were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. Following interviews, participants completed a brief survey about socio-demographic characteristics, recent sexual encounters and past HIV/STI testing history. Participants were compensated for their time with a $50 gift card following completion of the interview.
The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine Institutional Review Board approved the study and participants completed informed consent prior to interviews and surveys.
Qualitative interview protocol
We developed the interview guide based on previously published data and investigators’ past work with the study population ( ;  ). The guide was designed to explore participants’ app utilization patterns, sex partner selection, sexual networks, sexual behavior, risk perceptions and risk mitigation strategies, and feasibility and acceptability of outreach by public health professionals for sexual health promotion. While not central to the aim of the primary study, the guide also included questions about phenomenon noted from prior work on app use in this population including commercial sex work, substance use, and pre-exposure prophylaxis (the focus of this study).

Post- interview survey 
Measures relating to sociodemographic information, sexual behaviors, STI/HIV diagnoses, and app use were included in the survey.

Qualitative analysis 
We used a 3-stage analytic coding strategy described by Corbin and Strauss  that included open coding (examining transcripts for salient categories or codes), axial coding (identifying relationships between codes), and selective coding (identifying a core category integrating axial codes). Codes related to participants’ exposure to and discussions about PrEP on GSN-apps were identified through open coding and data immersion.
Through axial coding, a three-tiered coding hierarchy was developed based on categories that emerged during the open coding process performed by the first author. The first author then developed a codebook organized according to this hierarchy and trained two members of the research team on the completed codebook. We used stepwise replication ( ;  ) to improve the dependability of the coding process. These two coders double-coded 20% of the transcripts to establish inter-rater reliability based on the axial codes/categories that emerged from the analysis.
For selective coding, we identified a core category that related to all the previously identified codes and was relevant to the research question. We identified this core concept by writing memos throughout the coding process including descriptions of recurring themes, possible relationships among major categories and comparisons across the variation in participants’ responses to questions or expressions of phenomena relevant to the research question.
Results
Demographics
The present analysis is based on 17 YBMSM respondents recruited from one GSN application. Participants’ ages ranged from 18–24 with a mean age of 21.41. 76% (n=13) of the respondents reported being HIV-negative and 18% (n=3) reported being positive. Only one participant reported not knowing his HIV status. 76% (n=13) of the participants had been tested for HIV in the past year, and 29% (n=5) reported being diagnosed with one or more STI in the past year. 29% (n=5) reported 3 or more app-met sex partners in the past 30 days. Demographic characteristics are reported in  .
Table 1.
Demographic Characteristics of YBMSM Utilizing GSN Apps, Baltimore City, September 2015-February 2016 (N=17).
Qualitative Themes
While some participants had not heard of PrEP (N=1) previously or misunderstood (N=7) its meaning, the majority (N=14) described discussing it with a potential partner on an app or seeing it mentioned in another user’s profile. Perceptions of PrEP among this population were largely negative. Three themes emerged: (1) Mistrust of PrEP, (2) Association with sexual promiscuity, and (3) Concerns about lack of protection from other STIs.

Learning about PrEP on the App 
The majority of participants described mentions of PrEP within the GSN app, either on another user’s profile or in conversation with another user. This is consistent with prior research finding that 42% of HIV-negative men and 62% of HIV-positive men described an app-met partner disclosing PrEP usage . For some participants, this was the first time they had heard of PrEP.
I never heard of anything about PrEP until [GSN app name]…the fact that I’m learning about this thing that could potentially save my life or save a lot of my friends’ lives and I’m hearing it off of a sex app I mean which makes sense. That’s a good way to advertise it…But I was very surprised that I had never heard of it before. Like why hasn’t anybody else told me about this?  (24 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Some described hearing positive messages and endorsements from current PrEP users and from people living with HIV who promote as a risk reduction strategy for sex between serodiscordant partners.
A lot of people will promote it…they’re like, ‘Oh, get on this, find out more about it. Look this up. I’m on PrEP. I’m on this.’  (20 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Yeah, a lot of people, they are-- people have PrEP in their profile and they’re like, “You need to figure this one out too,” and, “You should be on this...” A lot of people will promote it, so the ones that are negative, they’re like, “Oh, get on this, find out more about it. Look this up. I’m on PrEP. I’m on this.” And the ones that are positive, they’re like, “As long as you’re on PrEP, we’re fine.” ( 20 -year-old, HIV-negative )
However, not all of the information participants learned on the app was accurate.
I’m like “What the f--k is PrEP?” And he was just like “Well, it’s a vaccine that protects you,” and I’m like “So that doesn’t mean you can just have sex all willy-nilly, though.”  (22-year-old, HIV-positive)

Mistrust of PrEP 
Many participants described mistrust of PrEP. Participants speculated about whether it was a legitimate and effective HIV prevention tool.
I just don’t trust it.
Interviewer: You don’t trust it?
A: No. It’s nice for the peace of mind. It’s like insurance. Nobody trusts their insurance company. Nobody believes they’re going to actually pay the full claim but sometimes they do, sometimes they don’t. It’s good to just have that peace of mind that hopefully it will work. But I don’t know. That’s kind of how I think of it.  (24-year-old, HIV-negative)
Some participants were skeptical about the authenticity noting that if HIV is preventable it should also be curable.
I don’t really know how to feel about that ‘cause I feel like all these years they try to find a cure or a treatment or whatever for HIV and now they’re trying to find something to prevent it instead of curing it.  (20 -year-old, HIV-negative)
That shit is phony…It’s not all the way sure that you won’t get HIV from taking PrEP, and that’s my whole thing. Everybody want to PrEP this down, PrEP that down, PrEP this down. It’s not guarantee. My only thing is, if they can make PrEP then they can find a cure for it.  (21 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Participants also described a concern that those who promoted PrEP had nefarious motivations.
One guy asked me if I had taken PREP. I was like, ‘no.’ I think it’s like one of those things that…that’s just people trying to set you up. Like trying to set the gay-- set gay people up. I don’t believe in-- I don’t like medication…They’re just trying to set us up. It’s probably like HIV with late exposure inside the medication itself.  (20 -year-old, HIV-negative)
These comments likely reflect medical mistrust in general and belief in HIV conspiracy theories, both of which have been well documented within Black communities and associated with treatment non-adherence in persons living with HIV ( ;  ;  ).

Association with sexual promiscuity 
Some participants associated PrEP with sexual promiscuity or other high risk behaviors (i.e., condomless intercourse).
It seems like that’s a copout to me. That’s like a copout, like that’s saying to people, hey, go out here and suck as many dicks as you want.  (21 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Because it makes it seem like, you know…by them being on PrEP makes them able to be more sexually free, I guess.  (24 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Similarly, participants also described a perception that PrEP was only necessary for those engaging in multiple high risk behaviors.
I mean, if I planned on having that much unprotected sex all the time like I know some people who do I would definitely use it, but I don’t, so... or if I just knew I was a person where every single day I was having unprotected sex with different people or multiple people and a lot of groups and parties, and I know guys that go to like bath houses and things like that, then absolutely.  (24 -year-old, HIV-negative)
These comments reflects ongoing stigma about PrEP usage within the MSM community, including the “Truvada whore” label that has been applied to PrEP users ( ;  ). Further, the relegation of PrEP to individuals with multiple risk behaviors likely represents an underestimation among our participations of their HIV acquisition risk.

Lack of protection from other STIs 
Many participants described skepticism about using PrEP due to its lack of protection from other STIs. Given participants’ negative statements about unprotected sex, this may reflect a preference for condoms as a prevention strategy among this population.
You know if somebody oh I’m on PrEP then nine times out of ten men know [GSN app name] is a hookup site they’re looking to have raw sex. But it’s still like if you’re smart it doesn’t prevent other STDs.  (23 -year-old, HIV-positive)
PrEP ain’t going to protect you from no chlamydia, gonorrhea, herpes, all that. So like you’re PrEPing for what? It’s other diseases that last longer than HIV too.  (21 -year-old, HIV-negative)
Discussion
Our findings suggest at-risk YBMSM in Baltimore are aware of and discussing PrEP, but generally have concerns about using it grounded in medical mistrust, stigma and concerns about other STIs. While PrEP is a powerful tool that can interrupt ongoing transmissions in the incident and prevalent networks many YBMSM are embedded in, proper messaging, accurate information and education are needed to account for the negative perceptions that surround it. Without this messaging, continued underuse in this priority population will expand rather than reduce HIV disparities.
Within our population, multiple participants described learning about PrEP for the first time through interactions with other users on the app. While this supports the feasibility of utilizing GSN apps to reach at risk YBMSM with information about PrEP, we did find that the information participants received from other users was not always accurate. Furthermore, we found that participants associated PrEP usage with sexual promiscuity and unprotected intercourse. This finding reflects negative attitudes about PrEP users but also a misunderstanding of PrEP risk eligibility and likely an underestimation of HIV acquisition risk among our participants. HIV risk underestimation is common among youth and has been associated with poor PrEP uptake among YBMSM specifically . Negative attitudes toward PrEP users have also been well documented in the literature as a barrier to uptake, with many MSM believing that PrEP is only used by promiscuous individuals who want to have unprotected intercourse and that men who use PrEP prefer receptive roles in sex ( ;  ). Within our sample, both of the HIV-positive men who knew about PrEP associated it with promiscuity or other negative qualities, as did five of the 11 HIV-negative men who knew about PrEP (45%). While this sample is too small to draw conclusions, the idea that HIV-positive men may view potential partners reporting PrEP use negatively merits further consideration. Furthermore, two of the HIV-negative men who associated PrEP with promiscuity reported being interested in taking PrEP due to its health benefits. This suggests that it is possible to overcome negative associations and dispel the notion that PrEP is only useful for those who engage regularly in high risk behaviors. Programs focusing on YBMSM should include components to overcome negative associations and frame PrEP in terms of its health benefits for all YBMSM. Previous studies using online technology to promote PrEP adherence among YBMSM have created private online social media communities for peer leaders to disseminate educational information , utilized GSN app profiles to answer sexual health questions and provide care linkages , and developed web-based health education modules featuring games and other interactive components .
Our participants also reported medical mistrust related to PrEP, including one participant currently taking PrEP. They were both skeptical of its effectiveness to prevent HIV and wary of the motives of individuals encouraging PrEP uptake. These attitudes reflect larger issues of medical mistrust within Black communities born from a history of racial discrimination within the US and unethical medical experiments such as the Tuskegee Syphilis Study ( ;  ;  ). We also found belief in HIV conspiracy theories among our sample. HIV conspiracy theories include the belief that HIV is a manmade virus used by the government to control minority populations and that those taking HIV medications are government guinea pigs ( ;  ). Medical mistrust among Black MSM has been associated with lower knowledge of HIV risk reduction strategies, having a detectable viral load, and not disclosing HIV status to partners . HIV conspiracy beliefs are related to treatment nonadherence, and within an individual’s network may be most influential when espoused by network members more similar to the individual and known to be HIV-positive ( ;  ). One prior study sought to overcome medical mistrust in the Black community by incorporating discrimination, disparities, and HIV misconceptions into its counselling curriculum . However, a systematic review concluded that there is insufficient evidence on the effectiveness of interventions to increase trust in doctors . However, peer-based strategies such as those described above, may be more effective with dispelling medical mistrust.
Finally, our participants listed concerns about contracting other STIs as a reason for not being interested in PrEP. While consistent condom usage has an estimated effectiveness of 70% for preventing HIV and STI transmission , research shows that condomless intercourse remains prevalent and that condom usage among MSM may actually be decreasing . Among our study population, 29% had at least one bacterial STI diagnosis within the past year, which suggests intermittent condom use in the sample despite negative comments about unprotected sex described by participants. There is mixed evidence on the impact PrEP has on risk behaviors and STI rates, with some studies reporting a significant decrease in condom use and a rise in STI diagnosis and others reporting no significant effects ( ;  ;  ). Our participants reported a presumed association between PrEP usage and condomless sex among their peers, but it is unclear if this presumption is true among YBMSM in Baltimore. 70% of the BMSM sampled in Baltimore in 2011 reported condom usage at last anal sex, indicating that condom usage may be a preferred risk reduction method among this population .
Limitations
The conclusions of this study are drawn from a purposively selected sample of 17 YBMSM from Baltimore. Our participants represent a priority population that is often underrepresented in research. However, our sample size is small and recruited from specific locations within one mid-sized city, limiting our ability to draw broad conclusions about YBMSM in the US from this data. Recruitment for this study was limited to residents of Baltimore utilizing one GSN app. Although we selected this app due to its frequent report by newly HIV-infected MSM, our findings may not apply to YBMSM in other settings or apps.
Conclusions
Despite these limitations, our data represent important insights from members of a priority community in need of targeted PrEP interventions to overcome persistent disparities in HIV infection. While PrEP is a powerful tool that can interrupt ongoing transmissions in the incident and prevalent networks many YBMSM are embedded in, proper messaging is needed to account for the negative perceptions that surround it. As described above, strategies to engage youth in online spaces have shown promising effects. This may be one medium where appropriate messaging can dispel some of the negative perceptions we observed, particularly when accurate messaging comes from trusted peers. More research is needed, but without appropriate messaging and effective strategies to engage at-risk youth, continued underuse in this important population will expand rather than reduce HIV disparities.
Acknowledgements:
This work was supported by the following funding sources: JHU Center for AIDS Research NIAID P30AI094189, CDC Category C Demonstration Project PS12–1201, CDC Minority HIV/AIDS Research Initiative U01 PS 005115.
Provide short biographical notes on all contributors here if the journal requires them.
Errol Fields is an Assistant Professor at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and is a board-certified pediatrician and adolescent medicine subspecialist. As a physician researcher he has dedicated his career to improving the health and life outcomes of adolescents and emerging adults, with particular attention to vulnerable and marginalized youth, through research, clinical medicine, education and advocacy. He is especially interested in the treatment and prevention of HIV and other sexually transmitted infections in adolescent and young adult populations. His research focuses on using mixed methodologies to understand and reduce racial disparities in HIV among young Black, gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men.
Nicole Thornton is a Senior Research Program Coordinator at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. She received graduate training at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in health education and communication, and her work focuses on understanding and reducing HIV disparities among gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men.
Amanda Long is a Senior Research Program Coordinator at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine. Her work focuses on supporting programs and studies that use mixed methodologies to understand and reduce HIV disparities among gay, bisexual men, and other men who have sex with men (MSM). Ms. Long’s training and studies in public health include receiving her master of science in public health from Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health, focusing on social and behavioral interventions.
Anthony Morgan has been coordinating sexual health service programs and research among Black and Latino gay, bisexual and gender diverse adolescents and young adult populations since 2002. He’s made a life-long commitment to advancing positive health outcomes among sexual, racial and gender minority adolescents and young adults.
Mudia Uzzi is a doctoral student in the Department of Health, Behavior & Society at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. He is also a NIH Predoctoral Fellow in Violence and Trauma Research.
Renata Arrington Sanders is an Associate Professor in the Division of General Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine at the Johns Hopkins University. She is board certified in adolescent medicine, internal medicine and pediatrics and serves on the Editorial Board of the American Board of Pediatrics, Adolescent Medicine Subboard. She serves on the Society for Adolescent Medicine the Board of Directors, Member-at-Large, the Medical Director of the Pediatric and Adolescent HIV/AIDS Program and the Director of the PrEP Program  located in the Harriet Lane Clinic at Johns Hopkins Children’s Center and the co-Director of the Adolescent and Young Adult Scientific Working Group Center for AIDS Research (CFAR). She is currently funded with a National Institutes of Health, CDC and the Baltimore City Health Department 1506/1509 grants.
Footnotes
Declaration of Interest: The first author has participated in HIV/PrEP Advisory Boards for Gilead Sciences. The co-authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.
Declaration of Interest: The first author has participated in HIV/PrEP Advisory Boards for Gilead Sciences. The co-authors have no other conflicts of interest to declare.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES