18 F-FDG Positron Emission Tomography Computed Tomography (PET/CT) has low positive predictive value (PPV) for detecting occult recurrence in asymptomatic patients with high-risk Stage IIB, IIC, and IIIA melanoma
Zachary J. Jaeger
1 Washington University School of Medicine
Gregory A. Williams
2 Section of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine
3 Alvin J. Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center
Ling Chen
4 Division of Biostatistics, Washington University School of Medicine
Joyce C. Mhlanga
5 Division of Nuclear Medicine, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine
Lynn A. Cornelius
3 Alvin J. Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center
6 Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine
Ryan C. Fields
2 Section of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine
3 Alvin J. Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center
Associated Data
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Abstract
Background and Objectives
High recurrence rates of Stages II and IIIA melanoma make close follow-up essential, especially with new adjuvant therapies for metastatic disease. However, there are currently no consensus guidelines for routine imaging for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA melanoma. The study aim was to determine the utility of  18 F-FDG PET/CT for detecting asymptomatic recurrence of melanoma after primary surgical resection.
Methods
This retrospective cohort study included 158 patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8 th  edition Stage IIB, IIC, or IIIA cutaneous melanoma who underwent an  18 F-FDG PET/CT from 2010 to 2020. We retrospectively analyzed clinical data after a median follow-up time of 39 months.
Results
We calculated a positive predictive value (PPV) of 32% (95% CI: 11–53%) for 154 routine PET/CTs, including six true positives and 13 false positives. PPV was 33% for Stage IIB, 50% for IIC, and 14% for IIIA. False positives were mostly benign or inflammatory foci (75%), and some other malignancies were found (21%).
Conclusions
This cohort of patients imaged for high-risk melanoma demonstrated a high false-positive rate and low PPV. These findings suggest that routine surveillance with  18 F-FDG PET/CT may not be indicated for monitoring recurrence in this population.
1 |. INTRODUCTION
Cutaneous melanoma is increasing in incidence and, once metastatic, has a significant mortality rate, with an estimated more than 100,000 newly diagnosed cases and 6,850 deaths in 2020. Five-year melanoma-specific survival (MSS) rates for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA are 87%, 82%, and 93%, respectively, with high recurrence rates ranging from 29–45%, 44–74%, and 30–46%, respectively.[ – ] Primary treatment for Stage II and IIIA melanoma is surgical excision with sentinel lymph node biopsy, and close multidisciplinary follow-up is essential to monitor for recurrence.[ , ]
Adjuvant immunologic therapies may also be considered in patients at high risk of relapse. The immune checkpoint inhibitors ipilimumab and nivolumab were approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2011 and 2014, respectively, for the treatment of metastatic melanoma after surgical excision.[ , ] Nivolumab-containing regimens have demonstrated superior long-term overall survival versus ipilimumab alone, without decreasing quality of life. Pembrolizumab is another immune checkpoint inhibitor that has shown improved recurrence-free survival in patients with Stage III melanoma versus lymph node dissection alone. Likewise, targeted therapies such as vemurafenib (a BRAF inhibitor) and cobimetinib (a MEK inhibitor) have proven effective as adjuvants in melanoma with BRAF mutations since their approval in 2011 and 2015, respectively. Although patients with Stage II melanoma have been excluded from these studies, ongoing clinical trials aim to expand treatment options for the high-risk Stages IIB and IIC (e.g.,  ,  , and  ).[ , ] Thus, with the advent of effective treatments for metastatic disease, it is important to monitor patients at high risk of recurrence and treat them promptly for the greatest possibility of prolonging survival.
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines on cutaneous melanoma recommend no follow-up imaging for Stages 0-IIA after primary surgical excision and regular routine CT or  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging for Stages IIIB-IV.. However, there is currently insufficient evidence to support the development of guidelines for routine surveillance imaging for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA melanoma.[ – ] Moreover, it is unclear what follow-up time intervals have the highest hazard rates and would provide the highest yield for imaging. The decision of routine imaging is left to the discretion of surgical oncologists, medical oncologists, and dermatologists, which has resulted in similarly risk-stratified patients undergoing heterogeneous imaging strategies including CT,  18 F-FDG PET/CT, nodal basin ultrasonography (US), and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as surveillance modalities. Routine CT has shown clinical benefit for following patients with Stages IIB and IIC melanoma, but it remains unclear whether routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT surveillance for these stages is useful.
Previous studies have shown that  18 F-FDG-PET/CT has a high negative predictive value (NPV) of 80–98%; however, a wider range of uncertainty surrounds its positive predictive value of approximately 56–86%, due to significant heterogeneity between prior study designs and stages included.[ – ] In other words, while negative results tend to accurately report the absence of recurrence, errors more often arise in interpreting the clinical course of action for positive results that may not represent true recurrence. To address this gap in the literature, the goal of this study was to determine the utility of  18 F-FDG PET/CT for detecting asymptomatic recurrence of high-risk Stages II and IIIA melanoma after primary surgical treatment.
2 |. METHODS
2.1 |. Data collection
This is a retrospective cohort study of adult patients with American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) eighth edition Stage IIB, IIC, or IIIA cutaneous melanoma who underwent  18 F-FDG-PET/CT imaging at Barnes-Jewish Hospital between 15 April 2010 and 15 April 2020. The Washington University Institutional Review Board approved this study and granted a waiver of informed consent. We identified eligible patients through a query of the electronic medical record (EMR) system. Patients were excluded if their imaging was performed after a confirmed recurrence or if they were diagnosed with another malignancy within the five years preceding the diagnosis of melanoma, except for non-melanoma skin cancers or  in situ  skin cancers. At our institution, patients with Stage IIB or IIIA melanoma are recommended for consideration of whole-body cross-sectional imaging every six months for two years and every 12 months for the next three years; Stage IIC, every three months for one year, every six months for the next year, and every 12 months for the next three years. Frequency of imaging followed our consensus guidelines but was heterogeneous in practice, due to several factors affecting patients’ ability to follow up, such as transportation issues, prohibitive cost, insurance delays, or social determinants of health. Imaging was performed in conjunction with a history and physical examination and other imaging studies as clinically indicated.
The primary aim of this study was to report the yield of routine, surveillance  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging by correlating imaging results with patient outcomes at the end of follow-up. The indication “routine” was defined as the absence of symptoms or clinically suspicious findings to warrant imaging. To evaluate the  18 F-FDG PET/CT results, we examined the nuclear radiologist’s clinical annotation of suspicion for recurrence of melanoma, with the possible decisions including positive, negative, or indeterminate, and compared the results with presence or absence of recurrence at the end of the follow-up period. One study team member reviewed all imaging data (ZJJ) and any discrepancies in findings were resolved with a nuclear medicine physician (JCM). Using previously defined methodology, we defined a true positive  18 F-FDG PET/CT result as when imaging detected a true recurrence of melanoma that was confirmed on subsequent pathology and a false positive result as when there was a suspicion for recurrence that was not confirmed as recurrence on further work-up.. A false negative resulted when  18 F-FDG PET/CT failed to detect evidence of disease in a patient who harbored occult disease and later experienced relapse by the time of the last follow-up or death. A true negative result was counted when  18 F-FDG PET/CT was negative for disease in a patient who never experienced relapse during the surveillance period. Benignancy of findings not biopsied could not be confirmed; however, clinical suspicion determined the plan of whether to pursue indeterminate lesions. We discussed any inconclusive cases with a nuclear radiologist and re-evaluated the status and course of all findings at the time of last follow-up.
2.2 |. Statistical analysis
Data were analyzed using SPSS® Statistics Version 26 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY). Descriptive statistics reported patient demographics and characteristics of primary melanomas and treatment. From true and false positives and negatives of routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging for this cohort, we calculated positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV), with 95% confidence intervals (CI) and the Yates-type correction (addition of 0.5) for cells with an observed value of zero. Two-sided  p -values were determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the normally distributed, continuous variable age at diagnosis; the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test for the non-normally distributed, continuous variable Breslow depth; and the Chi-square test for all other variables which were categorical. We calculated two-tailed  p -values for comparisons of predictive values between stages using the Fisher exact test for cells with expected values of less than five. We evaluated the same measures of yield, PPV and NPV, for 12-, 24-, and 36-month time intervals from primary surgical treatment to the time of each  18 F-FDG PET/CT.
We described false positives, summarized the actual findings masquerading as melanoma recurrence, and categorized further diagnostic work-up performed due to false positives. Other secondary outcomes of interest included five-year cumulative incidence of recurrence, five-year overall survival (OS), and five-year melanoma-specific survival (MSS). Kaplan-Meier survival estimates were obtained for OS and the log-rank test was used to compare OS curves among the stages. For recurrence of melanoma and MSS, competing risk analysis was performed and the Gray test was used for equality of cumulative incidence functions. We performed the competing risk survival analyses with SAS® Version 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC).
3 |. RESULTS
Clinicopathologic Characteristics
We identified 1,523 patients with a new diagnosis of melanoma in the EMR system. After screening for confirmation of diagnosis, stage, and history of undergoing  18 F-FDG PET/CT prior to confirmation of recurrence, a total of 158 patients were available for analyses, with 56 diagnoses (35%) of Stage IIB, 54 (34%) of Stage IIC, and 48 (30%) of Stage IIIA ( ;  p =0.72). The mean age at diagnosis of melanoma was 63.1 years (standard deviation [SD], 16.9), and patients with Stage IIIA were significantly younger (mean age 51.3 years, SD 14.7) than those with Stages IIB (mean age 66.3 years, SD 15.2) and IIC (mean age 70.3 years, SD 14.9;  p <0.001). Male patients represented 93 of 158 patients (59%), and 26 of 48 patients with Stage IIIA disease were female (54%;  p =0.085). All patients were non-Hispanic White, except for one whose EMR noted “other race”.
Table 1.
Clinicopathologic characteristics of patients in the cohort by Stage.
SD, standard deviation; IQR, interquartile range; SLNB, sentinel lymph node biopsy;  18 F-FDG PET/CT, 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed tomography.
There was no significant difference in stage between primary tumor sites. Overall, melanomas were more likely to be located on the trunk (62 of 158, 39%), compared to 31 on the upper extremities (20%), 37 on the lower extremities (23%), and 28 on the head and neck (18%;  p <0.001). Median Breslow depth in millimeters (mm) was 4.2 overall (interquartile range [IQR]: 1.7–5.8), with Stages IIB (4.2, IQR: 3.2–5.1) and IIC (6.0, IQR: 4.6–9.0) having deeper primary tumors by staging criteria and Stage IIIA tumors being less deep (1.3, IQR: 1.1–1.7;  p <0.001). Ulceration was present in 23 of 56 Stage IIB tumors (41% within stage) and, by staging criteria, all Stage IIC melanomas, but there were no ulcerated tumors in the Stage IIIA group ( p <0.001).
Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) was either incomplete (not completed due to technical factors of the procedure, such as no lymph node found on scintigraphy) or not clinically indicated due to significant comorbidities in 11 of 56 (20%) patients with Stage IIB and 17 of 54 (31%) patients with Stage IIC ( p =0.154;  ). Incomplete SLNB was denoted as “Nx”, while negative SLNB was denoted as “N0”; Stage IIIA melanomas had positive SLNB by staging criteria and thus were excluded from this subgroup analysis. Median Breslow depth was greater in Nx (6.0 mm, IQR: 4.9–9.1) than N0 (4.5 mm, IQR: 3.7–6.3) primary tumors ( p =0.010), but the numbers of ulcerated Nx (19/28, 68%) and N0 (58/82, 71%) melanomas did not differ significantly ( p =0.81;  ). Five of 28 (18%) Nx melanomas and 25 of 82 (30%) N0 melanomas recurred over the surveillance period. Two regional and three distant metastases of Nx tumors were detected at a median time of 10 months (IQR: 4–15), while in N0 tumors two local, 11 regional, and 12 distant recurrences were detected at a median time of 15 months (IQR: 10–28). The differences between location of recurrence ( p =0.77) and median time to recurrence ( p =0.15) were not statistically significant. Five-year OS was greater in N0 (74%, 95% CI: 63–86%) than Nx (44%, 95% CI: 20–67%) melanomas ( p =0.001), with 11 deaths unrelated to melanoma in the Nx group and 13 in the N0 group. There was one melanoma-related death after recurrence in the Nx group and seven in the N0 group. Five-year MSS did not demonstrate significant differences between patients with Nx (92%, 95% CI: 78–100%) and N0 (86%, 95% CI: 77–96%) melanomas ( p =0.573).
Table 2.
Clinicopathologic characteristics of patients in the cohort by status of sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) completion.
By staging criteria, Stage IIIA melanomas were not included in this subgroup analysis due to positive SLNB. Nx, SLNB incomplete; N0, SLNB negative; IQR, interquartile range; BD, Breslow Depth; OS, overall survival; CI, confidence interval; MSS, melanoma-specific survival.
Of 83 patients tested for BRAF mutations, 26 had positive results for the V600E mutation and one had a V600K mutation. 28 patients were treated with some form of adjuvant therapy prior to any recurrence, 15 of whom (54%) had Stage IIIA disease ( p =0.013;  ). Of six patients with Stage IIB who received adjuvant therapy, two received interferon treatment, one or two received immune checkpoint inhibitors (one participated in a double-blinded, placebo-controlled trial), one received a polyvalent melanoma vaccine, and one underwent radiation. Of seven patients with Stage IIC who received adjuvants, three underwent interferon treatment, one received an immune checkpoint inhibitor, one received targeted therapy, one received a polyvalent melanoma vaccine, and one underwent radiation. Of 15 patients with Stage IIIA, nine received immune checkpoint inhibitors, three received targeted therapy, and three received interferon treatment. The number of patients receiving immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy was significantly greater for Stage IIIA ( p =0.001).
Diagnostic Accuracy of 18F-FDG PET/CT
In this cohort, 154 skull-to-thigh or whole-body  18 F-FDG PET/CTs were performed routinely for 63 asymptomatic patients for the detection of potential occult recurrence , with an average of 2.4 scans per patient. There were 33 (22%) scans in 17 patients with Stage IIB disease, 44 (28%) in 17 patients with Stage IIC disease, and 77 (50%) in 29 patients with Stage IIIA disease. There were six true positives in six patients, 13 false positives in 11 patients, 17 false negatives in 11 patients, and 119 true negatives in 43 patients. The overall positive predictive value for routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT was 32% (6/19, 95% CI: 11–53%). The positive predictive values for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA were 33% (95% CI: 0–67%), 50% (95% CI: 17–83%), and 14% (95% CI: 0–43%), respectively, but there was no significant difference in positive predictive value between stages ( p =0.38). The overall negative predictive value for routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT was 88% (95% CI: 82–93%). Subgroup analysis by stage showed a significantly lower negative predictive value for Stage IIC (71%, 95% CI: 55–84%) compared to Stage IIB (100%, 95% CI: 91–100) and Stage IIIA (93%, 95% CI: 86–99%;  p <0.001).
Table 3.
Positive predictive value of routine surveillance  18 F-FDG PET/CT by Stage.
One routine scan resulted in both a false positive and a false negative.  18 F-FDG PET/CT, 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed tomography; TP, true positives; FP, false positives; FN, false negatives; TN, true negatives; PPV, positive predictive value; NPV, negative predictive value; CI, confidence interval.
We quantified predictive values for patients who received immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), compared to those who did not receive ICIs. Of 12 patients in the ICI group, nine of whom had Stage IIIA melanoma, there were two true positives, four false positives, no false negatives, and 35 true negatives, for a total of 41  18 F-FDG PET/CT scans of any indication. Of 146 patients in the non-ICI group, there were 21 true positives, 42 false positives, 45 false negatives, and 194 true negatives, for a total of 298  18 F-FDG PET/CT scans of any indication. Four scans resulted in both a false positive and a false negative. The positive predictive values of 33% (95% CI: 0–67%) for the ICI group and 33% (95% CI: 22–44%) for the non-ICI group were not significantly different ( p =1.00), whereas the negative predictive values of 100% (95% CI: 93–100%) for the ICI group and 81% (95% CI: 76–86%) for the non-ICI group were noted to have a statistically significant difference ( p =0.002).
When routine  18 F-FDG PET/CTs were analyzed by 12-month intervals following surgical excision and SLNB , the positive predictive value was 33% (95% CI: 0–67%) within the first year, 50% (95% CI: 0–100%) in the second year, and 25% (95% CI: 0–75%) in the third year after primary surgical excision ( p =0.75). The total positive predictive value within the first three years of surveillance was 35% (95% CI: 12–59%) for 132 scans. In the 22 scans at more than 36 months after surgery, no true positives and two false positives occurred. Negative predictive value was 79% (95% CI: 68–90%), 92% (95% CI: 82–100%), and 90 (95% CI: 75–100%) for the first, second, and third years after surgical treatment, respectively ( p =0.16). The only significant difference between stages was a lower negative predictive value for Stage IIC (52%, 95% CI: 33–71%;  p =0.001) in the first year of follow-up.
Table 4.
Positive predictive value of routine surveillance  18 F-FDG PET/CT, by time interval from surgery to the scan.
One scan performed at 10 months after surgery resulted in both a false positive and a false negative.  18 F-FDG PET/CT, 18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography computed tomography; TP, true positives; FP, false positives; FN, false negatives; TN, true negatives; PPV, positive predictive value; NPV, negative predictive value; CI, confidence interval; mo, months.
False Positives
A total of 48 false-positive findings were detected on  18 F-FDG PET/CT that were initially concerning for recurrence of melanoma but were confirmed otherwise . Two  18 F-FDG PET/CTs had two separate false-positive findings that resulted in further work-up. A total of 36 (75%) hypermetabolic findings were benign or inflammatory foci that required no additional diagnostic work-up. Two (4%) benign findings, a pleomorphic adenoma and a giant cell tumor of tendon sheath, required surgical treatment. A variety of other primary malignancies caused 10 (21%) false positives that were initially concerning for melanoma recurrence on  18 F-FDG PET/CT for any indication: three papillary thyroid cancers including a recurrent metastatic case, one colon cancer, one breast cancer, one non-melanoma skin cancer, one follicular thyroid cancer, one mantle cell lymphoma, one non-small cell lung cancer, and one parotid cancer. Of the seven primary malignancies detected by routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT, only one was uncurable (metastatic pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendothelioma). The other six were treatable and had good prognosis (three papillary thyroid carcinomas, cecal cancer, prostate adenocarcinoma, and mantle cell lymphoma).
Positive results on  18 F-FDG PET/CT led to an additional 159 imaging studies, procedures, and surgeries of continued diagnostic work-up: 23 ultrasonographies in 18 patients, either nodal basin surveillance or guiding a biopsy; 60 other imaging studies in 30 patients, including CT (either surveillance or guiding a biopsy),  18 F-FDG PET/CT, MRI, endoscopies, chest X-ray, and other modalities; 47 procedures in 28 patients, mostly biopsies of lymph nodes or subcutaneous nodules; and 29 surgeries or invasive biopsies of the chest or visceral organs in 20 patients. True positive  18 F-FDG PET/CT results led to two ultrasonographies (2/23, 9%), 17 imaging studies (17/60, 28%), nine minor procedures (9/47, 19%), and 14 surgeries or invasive biopsies (14/29, 48%). False positive  18 F-FDG PET/CT results led to 21 ultrasonographies (91%), 43 imaging studies (72%), 38 minor procedures (81%), and 15 surgeries or invasive biopsies (52%) that found no evidence of melanoma recurrence. However, three of these surgeries performed due to false-positive results did confirm clinically relevant tumors (non-small cell lung cancer, giant cell tumor of tendon sheath, and papillary thyroid carcinoma).
Of  18 F-FDG PET/CTs performed routinely, due to patient symptoms, or due to clinical suspicion or other imaging, there were 19 true positives and 26 false positives that had maximum standardized FDG-uptake values (SUVmax) recorded. True (10.0, IQR: 6.1–20.1) and false (8.6, IQR: 5.6–14.6) positives did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference in median SUVmax ( p =0.14), nor were there differences by indication of  18 F-FDG PET/CT (routine,  p =0.62; clinical suspicion,  p =0.17). The receiver operating characteristic curve revealed an area under the curve of 63%, with a 95% CI of 45–81% overlapping the null of 50% ( p =0.14). At optimal cutoff SUVmax of at least 17 for a true positive, sensitivity was 47% (95% CI: 26–68%) and specificity was 93% (95% CI: 82–100%). Thus, our model based on SUVmax was a poor predictor of true or false positives. Interestingly, all true positives detected by  18 F-FDG PET/CT were visible on the low-dose CT or on other imaging studies done at or around the time of the  18 F-FDG PET/CT.
Recurrence Rates and Survival
Median follow-up time was 39 months (IQR, 18–68). Of the 158 patients in this cohort, 37 (23%) experienced a recurrence of melanoma during total follow-up time. Of these patients with recurrence, the median time to recurrence was 13 months (IQR, 9–26). Overall recurrence rates during the surveillance period for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA were 20% (11 of 56), 35% (19 of 54), and 15% (7 of 48), respectively, which were significantly different ( p =0.035). Of all recurrences, routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT detected two (18%) of Stage IIB, three (16%) of Stage IIC, and one (14%) of Stage IIIA ( p =0.974), for a total of six of 37 (16%;  ). Other methods of detection of recurrence included patient-reported symptoms (17), other imaging (five CT, three chest X-ray, and one colonoscopy), physical exam (four), and staging  18 F-FDG PET/CT (one). After accounting for competing events in follow-up, cumulative incidence of recurrence at five years was 25% (95% CI: 13–38%) for Stage IIB, 36% (95% CI: 21–50%) for Stage IIC, and 18% (95% CI: 8–32%) for Stage IIIA . Cumulative incidence curves showed no statistically significant differences between stages ( p =0.234).
Cumulative incidence functions of recurrence by stage, with death as a competing risk. Cumulative incidence of recurrence at five years was 25% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 13–38%) for Stage IIB, 36% (95% CI: 21–50%) for Stage IIC, and 18% (95% CI: 8–32%) for Stage IIIA. The  p -value of the Gray test for equality of cumulative incidence functions was 0.234.
Of recurrences, two (5%) occurred locally at the original site of the primary tumor, nine (24%) recurred regionally in-transit or with satellitosis, nine involved the regional lymph node basin, and 17 (46%) presented with distant metastases. Seven of the 11 (64%) patients with Stage IIB who had a recurrence, eight of the 19 (42%) patients with Stage IIC, and two of the seven (29%) patients with Stage IIIA presented with distant metastases. The other five recurrences of Stage IIIA presented with regional in-transit or satellite disease, with no IIIA patients in this cohort experiencing nodal relapse. Routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT detected six recurrences in 155 scans (4%), of which four recurrences were distant metastases that led to the death of three patients within 15 months. Median survival after recurrence was seven months (IQR, 5–13; 95% CI: 5–9), and all melanoma-related deaths occurred within 22 months of primary surgical excision and within 15 months of recurrence. Of the 10 patients who died due to recurrent melanoma, six (60%) had an initial diagnosis of Stage IIC disease and nine (90%) recurred with distant metastases. One patient of those who died (10%) recurred with regional nodal metastases.
Five-year OS was 76% (95% CI: 58–84%) for Stage IIB, 62% (95% CI: 45–75%) for Stage IIC, and 91% (95% CI: 73–97%) for Stage IIIA . Kaplan-Meier curves for OS were significantly different between stages ( p =0.006). After accounting for death due to unrelated or unknown causes, five-year MSS was 93% (95% CI: 80–99%) for Stage IIB, 86% (95% CI: 74–95%) for Stage IIC, and 94% (95% CI: 82–99%) for Stage IIIA . However, in this cohort the MSS cumulative incidence functions were not significantly different between stages (Gray test  p =0.315).
A : Kaplan-Meier curves for overall survival (OS) probability by stage. Five-year OS was 76% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 58–84%) for Stage IIB, 62% (95% CI: 45–75%) for Stage IIC, and 91% (95% CI: 73–97%) for Stage IIIA. The  p -value of the pooled log-rank test was 0.006.  B : Melanoma-specific survival (MSS) probability curves by stage, with death due to an unrelated or unknown cause as a competing risk. Five-year MSS was 93% (95% CI: 80–99%) for Stage IIB, 86% (95% CI: 74–95%) for Stage IIC, and 94% (95% CI: 82–99%) for Stage IIIA. The  p -value of the Gray test for equality of cumulative incidence functions was 0.315.
4 |. DISCUSSION
This study describes the diagnostic accuracy of  18 F-FDG PET/CT for the detection of melanoma recurrence in a cohort of asymptomatic patients with high-risk Stage IIB, IIC, and IIIA melanoma. For routine imaging, we found an overall positive predictive value of 32% and negative predictive value of 88%. The number of false positive results, consisting of mostly benign or inflammatory foci and other malignancies, decreased the positive predictive value in our cohort and resulted in further diagnostic work-up with few clinically relevant findings. Positive predictive value remained low between stages and was highest for IIC, though differences did not reach statistical significance. Negative predictive value was generally high as expected, except within the first year of follow-up for Stage IIC (52%). Moreover, routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT yielded low positive predictive value across all 12-, 24-, and 36-month time intervals. Most routine scans were within 36 months of surgical excision of the primary tumor and no true positives were found on routine screening after three years, which suggests that routine PET/CT imaging is not often used and not useful after three years.
In subgroup analysis of Nx and N0 primary tumors, recurrence rates and five-year MSS were comparable, despite slightly greater Breslow depth and worse five-year OS in the Nx group. Thus, it is likely that the Nx group did not truly have undetected higher-stage primary tumors. Interestingly and possibly accounting for the lower five-year OS, the Nx group may have been sicker in general, due to comorbidities preventing successful SLNB. Patients with Stage IIIA melanoma were significantly younger than were those with Stage IIB/C. This finding may account for some of the difference between the Kaplan-Meier curves for OS, which appeared to be dampened in the curves for MSS. Furthermore, patients with Stage IIIA disease were more likely to be treated with adjuvant or immunotherapy compared with Stage IIB/C, which reflects recent FDA approval of immune checkpoint inhibitors for surgically resected Stage III disease. Although the small number of patients on immunotherapy limited our analysis, those on immune checkpoint inhibitors were nearly all Stage IIIA and had similarly low positive predictive value (33%) and greater negative predictive value (100%) of  18 F-FDG PET/CT surveillance.
Five-year survival rates in our cohort paralleled those of prior studies, but recurrence rates were lower than expected.[ – ] The present study focuses primarily on routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA, while prior studies investigating the role of PET in melanoma surveillance have reported different ranges of stages and clinical indications for imaging.[ – ] For example, the paper by Lewin et al. reported in subgroup analysis a negative predictive value of 84% for Stage IIIA at 18 months, but an overall positive predictive value of 56% of any scan for relapse. Because prevalence of disease influences predictive value, the positive and negative predictive values in our cohort may differ from those in other analyses if the prevalence or population significantly vary between studies. A number of reasons may explain the lower recurrence rates in our study: shorter median follow-up time, selection bias in excluding patients with confirmed recurrences, or positive responses to adjuvant therapy. In addition, this was a retrospective analysis and  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging for all high-risk Stage IIB/C and IIIA patients was not consistently applied. We did not include results from routine CT imaging in our EMR query, and thus, the recurrences detected in those patients were not included.
A strength of this study is the emphasis on the predictive values of routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT as a marker of the clinician’s confidence in the effectiveness to detect asymptomatic recurrence or reassure asymptomatic patients. A high negative predictive value in this cohort provides patient reassurance after negative results, whereas a relatively high false-positive rate in this particular patient population clouds the clinical decision-making process after positive results.  18 F-FDG is a radiopharmaceutical that detects several malignancies as well as inflammation, resulting in increased SUV uptake on  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging for melanoma metastases, potentially yielding false positive results.[ , ] In analysis of SUVmax in positive findings, low values for sensitivity and area under the curve resulted in a poor model for predicting true or false positives. Furthermore, all true positives detected by  18 F-FDG PET/CT in our cohort were apparent on the low-dose CT component alone or on other imaging modalities around the time of the  18 F-FDG PET/CT. Thus, the question arises whether the added diagnostic benefit of PET was necessary, if plain CT would have been sufficient for biopsy and diagnosis. Given our finding of low positive predictive value of  18 F-FDG PET/CT for Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA, we generally reserve routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT for following higher-risk features and may instead consider recommending routine CT first, depending on the clinical concern. However, because we did not compare  18 F-FDG PET/CT to any other modalities, we cannot speculate as to the optimal routine surveillance strategy at this time. A recent study found benefits for CT surveillance in Stage II melanoma, but prospective comparative studies between  18 F-FDG PET/CT and CT are needed to address the question of which modality is superior for this patient population.
Increased melanoma survivorship due to increasing incidence and a stable mortality rate has led to a greater need for surveillance. Multidisciplinary care by the dermatologist, surgical oncologist, and medical oncologist is essential for patients with high-risk Stage II and III melanoma. The German Dermatologic Cooperative Oncology Group sentinel lymph-node trials (DeCOG-SLT) and the second Multicenter Selective Lymphadenectomy Trial (MSLT-II) have significantly decreased morbidity while preserving safety and efficacy in patients with positive sentinel lymph nodes.[ , ] Although no patients with Stage IIIA in our cohort relapsed in the same nodal basin as their positive SLNB, regular surveillance of the regional nodal basin with ultrasonography and clinical follow-up in these patients is recommended. Those with nodal recurrence detected by routine ultrasonography and confirmed by biopsy before undergoing re-staging  18 F-FDG PET/CT would have been excluded from our EMR search. Any definitive conclusions regarding developing imaging strategies for Stage IIB/C and IIIA melanoma patients will require larger multi-institutional, prospective, and possibly randomized trials. Nevertheless, our findings of a low PPV for  18 F-FDG PET/CT in Stage IIIA patients compared to IIB/C patients, their higher MSS, and the utility of surveillance ultrasound could potentially support differing imaging regimens and/or modalities for these patients.
As noted in the AJCC eighth edition staging guidelines and recent studies, Stage IIC demonstrates a higher recurrence rate (44–74%) than those of Stages IIB and IIIA (29–45% and 30–46%, respectively) and lower five-year MSS.[ – , ] Although lymph node involvement is a powerful predictor of recurrence in melanoma, T3b, T4a, and T4b tumors portend a worse prognosis than does micro-metastatic nodal disease. As it remains under debate what risk of recurrence merits adjuvant or neoadjuvant therapy, clinical trials in patients with Stage IIB/C and IIIA with greater than 1-mm micro-metastases are ongoing to study the safety and efficacy of immunologic and targeted adjuvant therapies already approved for Stage III and IV disease (e.g.,  ,  ,  , and  ). Neoadjuvant therapy and optimal sequencing of current targeted and immune therapies are also areas of active investigation. This expansion of treatment availability has opened the door for promising, safe, effective treatments to patients at high risk of recurrence. However, it remains unclear whether pre-symptomatic detection of recurrence by imaging translates to improved outcomes without lead-time bias when coupled with new adjuvant immunotherapies.[ – ] With the inclusion of FDA-approved adjuvant therapy and more clinical trials for patients with high-risk melanoma, we may observe an increase in melanoma-specific survival and recurrence-free survival within the next decade. Future studies should explore the effects of routine surveillance  18 F-FDG PET/CT and early detection of recurrence on survival outcomes.
There were three main limitations of this study. First, the sample size of patients undergoing routine surveillance led to wide confidence intervals for measures of yield. Although the upper limits of confidence intervals for positive predictive values remained relatively low, further studies with larger sample sizes for these stages would provide greater precision in analyses. Second, the inclusion criteria of this retrospective cohort may have introduced selection bias toward patients who were less likely to have clinically detected disease, as  18 F-FDG PET/CTs performed after confirmation of recurrence were not recorded in this dataset. Nevertheless, this cohort may more precisely reflect the pragmatic use of truly routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT for detecting asymptomatic recurrence. Patients with symptoms or signs suspicious for recurrence require imaging, as the positive predictive value for these indications in our cohort may not accurately generalize to the larger population. Finally, a wide range of surveillance strategies are currently and inconsistently employed, as reflected in our study. This resulted in substantial heterogeneity of imaging schedules among patients, which may have influenced the apparent diagnostic accuracy. Further investigations could mitigate this issue by prospective assignment of imaging schedules, as the yield of imaging may be maximized in practice by guidelines that recommend regularly scheduled surveillance. Patients with high-risk melanoma or on adjuvant therapy require frequent surveillance imaging to monitor for metastases, especially in the first few years of follow-up when the risk of recurrence is greatest.
Psychosocial and financial ramifications of false positives are important considerations and must be placed in the context of the clinical situation.[ , , ] If the decision to undergo routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT screening is made, physicians should counsel patients on the risk of false positives to reduce their anxiety, so they are aware of the detection of both potentially clinically irrelevant and relevant findings, including additional primary malignancies. While the detection of a few other malignancies with good prognosis in this cohort could be considered a potential secondary benefit of routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT, it cannot replace routine cancer screening. Patients with or without cancer should adhere to NCCN guidelines for age-appropriate oncologic screening. In addition, although CT radiation exposure from  18 F-FDG PET/CT is lower than that from high-resolution or standard diagnostic CT, cumulative radiation exposure remains relevant as it is associated with a possible increased risk of cancer. Furthermore, the cost of nuclear imaging is not trivial.[ , ] At our institution, professional reads and facility fees charge approximately $800 and $5,469, respectively, for skull-to-thigh and $825 and $5,874, respectively, for whole-body  18 F-FDG PET/CT. Frequent nuclear imaging, combined with highly variable insurance coverage, can accumulate financial burden for patients needing long-term surveillance. Thus, determining the optimal risk-benefit ratio for imaging while accounting for healthcare costs is important in the treatment of patients with melanoma and other solid tumors. Future studies should perform cost-effectiveness analysis for this population to examine the cost of follow-up imaging, considering factors such as risk of recurrence, diagnostic accuracy of imaging, and patient willingness-to-pay thresholds.
5 |. CONCLUSIONS
The results of this retrospective cohort of patients with resected melanoma indicate that routine  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging yields many false positives for high-risk Stages IIB, IIC, and IIIA and, thus, a low positive predictive value. False positives were mostly benign or inflammatory foci, though some other primary malignancies were detected on routine imaging. Due to the vagueness of the current guidelines leaving routine surveillance to physician discretion, and considering the benefits and risks of imaging, our conclusions should raise awareness of the potential high false-positive rate—and consequences thereof—for this use of  18 F-FDG PET/CT.
Synopsis for Table of Contents
This retrospective cohort study aimed to determine the diagnostic accuracy of  18 F-FDG PET/CT for detecting asymptomatic recurrence of melanoma after definitive surgical treatment of Stage II and III melanoma. In our analysis, false positive results, consisting of benign or inflammatory foci as well as other primary malignancies, contributed to a low positive predictive value for routine surveillance  18 F-FDG PET/CT imaging.
Supplementary Material
supinfo
Acknowledgements
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number TL1TR002344. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. This project utilized the Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) which is supported by the Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) Grant (UL1 TR000448) and Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center and National Cancer Institute Cancer Center Support Grant (P30 CA091842). The Siteman Biostatistics Shared Resources Core offered initial insight into the statistical approach for this project. Additional thanks to Natalia Maverakis, MPH, and fellow TL1 scholar Shruti Gupta, MSCI, for their insightful comments and proofreading.
Acronyms
Footnotes
Disclosures : The authors report no disclosures or conflicts of interest.
Disclosures : The authors report no disclosures or conflicts of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES