Electrical resistivity imaging of an enhanced aquifer recharge site
Jon Fields, Jr
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Tyler Tandy
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Todd Halihan
2 Boone Pickens School of Geology, Oklahoma State University, 105 Noble Research Center, Stillwater, OK 74075, USA
Randall Ross
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Doug Beak
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Russell Neill
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Justin Groves
1 Robert S. Kerr Environmental Research Center, US Environmental Protection Agency, 919 Kerr Research Drive, Ada, OK 74820, USA
Associated Data
Abstract
Enhanced aquifer recharge (EAR) is defined as any engineered structure or enhanced natural feature designed to convey stormwater, surface water or wastewater directly into an aquifer (e.g. aquifer storage and recovery (ASR) wells) or into the vadose zone eventually percolating to an aquifer (e.g. spreading basins, dry well, etc.;  ). Identifying the storage and flow capabilities of complex aquifers can improve the efficacy of many conceptual site models (CSM) for sites considered for ASR projects. In a karst setting, the EAR process may be able to take advantage of natural surficial features and the increased storage capacity of karst aquifers to improve recharge to groundwater. However, the suitability for an EAR project in a karst setting depends on the maturity of the karst and its preceding epikarst. The focus of flow within the epikarst causes enlargement of fractures and karst conduits. Thus, the storage and transmissivity within the karst vary greatly. Electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) is a well-known geophysical tool for mapping fractures and sinkholes, typical in karst settings. Locating enhanced water conveyance structures of a karst aquifer can improve the design and operation of an EAR site. This study investigated the hydraulic connection between shallow and deep groundwater using ERI to identify potential flow pathways and to improve our understanding of the storage mechanisms of the epikarst. The results presented in this paper validate the effectiveness of ERI in characterizing karst/epikarst and delineating soil, bedrock and local faults and fractures in the subsurface.
1. Introduction
The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimated that groundwater provides roughly half of the US drinking water supply and provides water for other uses such as irrigation and self-supplied industrial uses . In 2000, USGS  indicated that ∼348 000 ML/day (76 500 Mgal/day) of groundwater was used from 66 principal aquifers in the USA, with ∼76% of the withdrawals being used for irrigation. With the increase in extreme weather, droughts, increasing populations and urban development, the demand for groundwater will ultimately increase, especially in the western USA (  ;  ), increasing the need to augment groundwater supplies. Enhanced aquifer recharge (EAR) is one promising way to augment groundwater supplies by capturing and infiltrating water into the subsurface .
EAR is defined as any engineered structure or enhanced natural feature designed to convey stormwater, surface water or treated wastewater directly into an aquifer (e.g. aquifer storage and recovery (ASR) wells) or into the vadose zone eventually percolating to an aquifer (e.g. spreading basins, dry wells, etc.;  ). In this study, the EAR structure evaluated was a natural feature (sinkhole) that conveyed storm derived overland flow events into the vadose zone of a weathered carbonate bedrock with subsequent movement to a karst aquifer. Karst aquifer recharge functions in two ways: autogenic, quick transmission of water through open conduits into the aquifer (i.e. karst); or allogenic, slow or delayed transmission of water through soil before reaching the aquifer (i.e. mantled epikarst; ( ;  )).
The epikarst zone consists of weathered carbonate bedrock capable of storage and transmission of water ( ;  ). It is commonly defined as existing solely in the vadose zone ( ;  ;  ;  ); however, the extent of the epikarst varies by perspective and discipline . Depending on the maturity of the epikarst, soils funnel into larger voids and complicate the distinction between the epikarst and soil. Some studies include soil in the epikarst definition  while others consider it distinctly different, separated at the soil-bedrock contact where secondary porosities are >10% in the epikarst ( ;  ;  ). For the soil scientists, epikarst might be considered a mineral soil. Therefore, the authors here define the top of the epikarst as the contact with the base of soil. This contact is herein referred to as the soil-weathered bedrock contact (S-WB;  ). The base of the epikarst can be established at the depth where competent (unweathered) bedrock is encountered and secondary porosities are below 2% in the vadose zone , or at a variable depth dependent on the influence of localized stratigraphy and bounding capillary barrier of the competent bedrock ( ;  ). This paper defines the base of epikarst as competent (unweathered) bedrock regardless of the respective state of saturation (i.e. vadose or phreatic). This contact is herein referred to as the weathered bedrock-competent bedrock contact (WB-CB,  ).
Idealized cross-section depicting karst conduits, karst and epikarst sinkholes, water table and the contacts between soil and weathered bedrock (S-WB contact), and between weathered bedrock and competent bedrock (WB-CB contact).
Weathering processes play a role in the maturity of a karst setting due to dissolution caused by stored water  and thus greatly affect the capacity for recharge and storage. Older, subsurface karst weather more heterogeneously than epikarst, consisting of bedrock that dissolved at depth along a fracture or joint (e.g. karst conduits;  ;  ;  ). Younger, mantled epikarst are more spatially homogenous than karst and have an extensive weathering profile due to storage, slow percolation and dissolution from diffuse infiltration of water. Karst settings do not always have an epikarst component, but where it does exist, the epikarst is crucial to further karst development. Previous studies indicate the epikarst zone may be capable of storing a significant volume of groundwater due to the extensive weathering ( ;  ). Well-organized epikarst systems help funnel precipitation recharge to fractures and karst conduits but is restricted by the permeability at the base of the epikarst zone, creating perched water tables that can generate more lateral flow than vertical flow ( ;  ;  ;  ).
Geophysical tools can be used to detect geologic structures, track groundwater, characterize aquifers and better place wells for monitoring recharge and recovery ( ;  ). Electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) is a geophysical technique demonstrated to be useful in characterizing epikarst and karst features ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ) and was the primary geophysical technique used in this study. Electrical resistivity imaging, or surface DC multielectrode resistivity surveying, is the process of injecting an electrical current into the ground via a pair of electrodes and measuring the resulting potential in a separate pair of electrodes. The mapping of faults and aquifers was one of the earliest uses of electrical geophysics ( ;  ;  ). The geophysical surveys producea subsurface resistivity distribution. Identifying such features requires finite element method forward modeling to generate a synthetic resistivity model and smooth method inversion to iteratively compare that synthetic model to the measured resistivity model until the two models converge . Interpretation of data consists of exploring the resulting model for anomalies in the electric property distribution such as areas of contrasting electrical resistivities (or conductivities); these anomalies indicate areas of interest for further investigation.
We know now that relatively low or high resistivity in the subsurface is caused not only by porosity and saturation ( ;  ), but by chemistry of the water and parent rock , clay mineral content ( ;  ), temperature ( ;  ), microbial communities ( ;  ;  ) and fracture or fault zones ( ;  ). Other studies have used derivations of the resulting datasets (i.e. strong electrical gradients) to produce accurate predictions of lithologic and structural targets in the subsurface ( ;  ;  ;  ). However, the reliable and consistent detection of a bedrock surface within a highly fractured epikarst setting remains a challenge. Abrupt changes in the electrical resistivity (ER) datasets are used to locate epikarst and karst features ( ;  ). Similarly, the bedrock contact is supported through selecting strong electrical gradients in ER datasets integrated with geotechnical borings ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ). However, the use of strong electrical gradients to differentiate between soil and epikarst or between weathered and competent bedrock is lacking in the literature; no case studies could be found.
The epikarst and karst play a critical role in storage and transmission of groundwater during large precipitation recharge events. Lateral flow is of particular importance in the epikarst zone and vertical flow in the karst features . The conceptual site model (CSM) for this EAR site is that precipitation enters the Arbuckle–Simpson aquifer (ASA) as rainfall infiltrates and is temporarily stored in the epikarst zone before draining into the aquifer, and as overland flow directly recharges the aquifer via a karst sinkhole . The aim of this study is to identify karst features and areas of least resistance to transmission of groundwater. Using ERI, the potential flow pathways in the vadose and shallow phreatic groundwater flow systems of the karst and the storage mechanisms of the epikarst were characterized. The karst sinkhole is in the process of being permitted as a class 5 injection well for use as an EAR site.
1.1. Site description
The City of Ada EAR site, ∼11 ha in size, is located 1.6 km southwest of Byrds Mill Spring , the largest spring in Oklahoma and water source for most of Pontotoc County . The EAR site sits on a mantled karst positioned in the north-eastern portion of the ASA, on the Hunton Anticline. The ASA is part of the larger Arbuckle Mountains complex seen throughout the region of south-central Oklahoma and is composed primarily of Arbuckle group carbonates deposited during the late Cambrian and early Ordovician with a general thickness of 1067 m . The eastern region of the aquifer is characterized by northeast to southwest trending, high-angle faults produced from block faulting. The Hunton Anticline was less folded than other areas of the Arbuckle Mountains, thus the faults are situated in relatively flat rock with a <20° dip ( ;  ). Faulting in the region allows surface water to penetrate the aquifer with relative ease. The Ham Fault bisects Byrds Mill Spring (BMS) that has been observed to increase flow following precipitation events. As mapped, the Ham Fault terminates between BMS and the EAR site. However, the EAR sinkhole, the largest sinkhole on the EAR site, aligns with the Ham’s Fault trend to BMS, which may provide a connection during storm events.
Aerial map of the EAR sinkhole relative to BMS. The mapped fault (yellow, solid line) trending northeast to southwest that ends between the EAR sinkhole and BMS is the Ham Fault. Other mapped faults (yellow lines) trend southeast-northwest and abut the Ham Fault. BMS spring and intermittent drainage features mapped in teal (short dashed lines). GoogleEarth image: imagery date: 3/11/2018; 34°35’27.10’ N, 96°40’19.89’ W; elevation 0 m; eye altitude 2.27 km.
A man-made pond exists on the EAR site, hosting aquatic and amphibian wildlife, and connects to the EAR sinkhole via a fracture trace to the southeast of the pond. Elevation of the EAR sinkhole is below the base of the pond, but a small berm restricts inflow to the sinkhole to only large overland flow events. The pond acts as both a collector for sinkhole infiltration and a surface reservoir. Overland flow at the site flows from the northeast and southeast to the west before reaching the pond that has an outflow spillway to the southwest of the site .   depicts several visual depressions on the surface of the EAR site noted as additional sinkholes that appear in the low-lying areas likely contribute to infiltration in the epikarst.
EAR field site near Fittstown, OK. (a) Aerial photo indicates electrode positions of 4-m spaced ERI surveys (red cross), sinkholes (yellow diamonds), sinkhole intended for use for EAR (pink triangle) and groundwater wells (black circles with crosses). (b) Topographic map demonstrates the low-lying nature of the site, suitable for runoff (dashed lines) collection during precipitation events.
2. Material and methods
Data acquisition for ERI requires specific geophysical hardware and software. The geophysical hardware is used to make four-point measurements of transfer resistance or the measure of change in voltage due to current. Each measurement involves a pair of electrodes used to inject an electrical current into the subsurface and another pair of electrodes to measure the resulting potential difference or voltage. An ERI survey can consist of thousands of these measurements. The transfer resistance can be used to calculate apparent resistivity through the application of a geometric factor . Inversion software models the resulting apparent resistivity data as modeled bulk resistivity, which can then be interpreted. The results are two-dimensional (2D) images of the subsurface resistivity below the line of electrodes. Determination of overburden thickness uses post-processing data evaluation and in-field confirmation with direct-push (DP) technology.
2.1. 2D electrical resistivity surveys
Twenty-eight ERI surveys across 14 transects were implemented in a grid pattern around the study site with seven transects oriented west to east and seven oriented south to north . ER surveys were designed to image the subsurface surrounding notable site features (i.e. site pond, existing wells and sinkholes) using a 64-electrode array. The depth of investigation and data resolution is dependent on the electrode spacing. Fourteen ERI surveys each used 4-m spacing resulting in a lateral resolution of 2 m, total length of 252 m and depth of investigation of 50 m. The other 14 ERI surveys each used 2-m spacing for a lateral resolution of 1 m, total length of 126 m and depth of 26 m. Each 2-m ERI survey was positioned in areas preliminarily identified in 4-m surveys as likely fractured or extensively weathered.
Elevations of each electrode were surveyed in meters above mean sea level (m amsl) by recording relative elevations referenced to surveyed benchmarks located on site using the differential leveling surveying method using a Nikon AP-8 atopa tripod anda 16 ft stadia rod, later converted to meters . Each ERI survey was oriented in a straight line using a Brunton Pocket Transit and measuring tapes. Stainless steel stakes were inserted into the soil to a depth of ∼20 cm at each electrode location. Resistivity cables were then connected to corresponding stakes. ER surveys always started with electrode 1 at either the southernmost or westernmost electrode, depending on the orientation of the transect.
2.2. Data acquisition
The ERI data were collected using the SuperSting R8/IP earth resistivity meter  powered using a portable generator. The SuperSting was tested for quality assurance using a receiver test before and after the data collection to ensure the instrument was operating properly. During data acquisition, contact resistance testing was recorded to ensure good contact between the electrode and stake, and between the stake and soil. Contact resistance values <2000 Ω were considered good quality. If contact was >2000 Ω, then electrically conductive fluid (i.e. salt water) was poured on the ground surrounding the stake. Acquisition was conducted using a strong gradient array provided by Advanced Geosciences, Inc. (AGI) using a multielectrode, multichannel structure .
2.3. Data processing
The resistivity data collected in the field were processed using forward modeling and inversion to calculate a true resistivity from the measured apparent resistivity. The collected data were processed using EarthImager 2D software . Data processing methods are described next.
Forward modeling is required to test the fit of synthetic and observed models. The inversion approach used a finite element method forward model to generate a synthetic resistivity model. Smooth method inversion modeling matches the synthetic resistivity model as best fit to the measured resistivity model until the two models converge . Where the models do not converge or fit poorly, these data are considered erroneous. Processing requires multiple iterations of inversions to reduce poorly fitting, or noisy data that are determined by the relative data misfit (RDM) ratio, root mean square (RMS) error and L2-norm .
Using EarthImager 2D, we were able to procedurally filter and remove poorly fitting data. Minimum resistivity and maximum resistivity thresholds were set at 1 and 10 000  Ω  m −1 , respectively. Both the RMS error and L2-norm were assessed for reduction of data noise and completion of the inversion process. The goal was to reduce the RMS percentage below 5%, although data are acceptable up to 10% . The L2-norm depends on the estimate of data weights and determines when the inversion has converged, with unity between calculated and measured data at 1.0 or smaller . The inversion process is considered complete when these conditions are met, with the primary target of reducing RMS percentage and a secondary target of reducing the L2-norm. After an inversion, the data histogram was reviewed to understand the RDM ratio that is the difference of the calculated and measured data, to the measured data. Where the RDM ratio is >50% on the histogram, the data are considered poor data . In this study, poorly fitting data as determined by the RDM ratio, were manually removed following each inversion until the RDM ratio was below 30% and the inversion process was considered complete. Data removal was documented for each iteration; the average amount of data removed from this process was 1% of the original dataset. Each ERI survey was processed through multiple inversions until the quality control standards (i.e. RDM < 50%, RMS < 10%, L2-norm ∼1.0) were met. The inverted resistivity section was exported as distance, depth and resistivity data files to be visualized in post-processing software. The data file was combined with GPS data from the site to produce  XYZR  (true location in 3D-space,  XYZ  and their corresponding resistivity values,  R ) files.
2.4. Post-processing
Post-processing was conducted using Golden Software Surfer for the purpose of interpolation, data visualization and interpretation. The resulting inverted resistivity datasets were gridded using a standard kriging method, producing grid files that were interpolated for data visualization. The logarithm of the resistivity values (log(Ω m −1 )) in the inverted dataset were taken to evaluate changes in the datasets. Logarithmic values were used due to the wide range of resistivity values in the results. First and second derivatives of the resistivity logarithm were calculated in Surfer to produce Gradient and Laplacian grids, respectively, to assist interpretation. The Laplacian grids were used to identify the zero-crossing or zero-line (i.e. value of zero in second derivative) in the dataset that can objectively identify lithologic and structural boundaries ( ;  ). The gradient grids were used to determine the maximum gradient value (i.e. maximum of the derivative) in the dataset at the location of the zero-crossing ( ;  ). Using these two grids, the S-WB and WB-CB boundaries and shallow karst features were selected in areas where a zero-crossing and high electrical gradient co-exist in the datasets.
High-resolution map view grids were generated for different elevations (∼1100 × 240 nodes) and displayed on a logarithmic scale which is discussed in the Results section. The  XYZR  files for all 14, 4-m surveys were compiled to create a spreadsheet of all resistivity values in three-dimensional (3D) space.  XYZR  values for varying depths, starting at 340 m amsl and decreasing in 5-m stepwise increments, were generated for interpolation in Surfer using the same kriging method. The resulting resistivity values at these elevations (e.g. 340 m, 335 m, etc.) generated 2D elevation-slices. Similar high-resolution grids were also produced.
2.5. Direct-push borings
Field notes from each ERI survey and a GeoProbe Systems DP rig with the Direct Image SC400 Electrical Conductivity (EC) Array tool were used to determine thickness of overburden at select locations. Boring locations were selected along ERI surveys where predicted depth to bedrock from the post-processed surveys could be tested. Field notes documented thin, rocky soils and outcrop locations and therefore were interpreted as having thicknesses of <1 m. Some soils in the area have total thicknesses of <1 m . In other areas, the EC Array tool on the DP rig was used to map soil conductivity profiles (the inverse of resistivity) and to determine depth of refusal. EC of the soil is a function of texture or grainsize, soil saturation and salinity, organic matter content and clay mineral content ( ;  ). Soil conductivity (S/m) values were logged every 1.52 cm and then converted to resistivity (Ω m −1 ), the inverse of conductivity. Overburden thicknesses based on this depth of refusal were used in conjunction with the ERI survey results to determine depth to bedrock (weathered or competent) across the site.
3. Results and discussion
The 2D ERI surveys were compared to DP borings to confirm ERI resistivity model and depth to bedrock. The resulting resistivity data values  were categorized as either electrically conductive (<100 Ω m −1 ), resistive (100–550 Ω m −1 ), very resistive (550–1000 Ω m −1 ) or highly resistive (>1000 Ω m −1 ). Soils can have a large range in resistivities from low resistivity saturated clay to high resistivity dry gravel ( ;  ), however, we know the EAR site soil is composed of clay, silty-clay and sandy-loam soils, and literature describes these soils at resistivities below 100 Ω m −1  ( ;  ;  ). DP borings confirmed soil resistivities of below 100  Ω  m −1  and weathered bedrock resistivities upwards of, and in some instances over, 1000 Ω m −1 . Literature resistivity values for unweathered dolomite bedrock are commonly >1000 Ω m −1  ( ;  ). Epikarst and karst characterized by secondary porosity and fracture zones have resistivities below 1000 Ω m −1 , with soil or water filled pores below 100 Ω m −1  ( ;  ). The ER scale  is for site-specific data visualization and referenced throughout.
(a) Resistivity values on logarithmic scale for ERI datasets. Green and purple represent more electrically conductive locations and blues and grays represent more electrically resistive locations. (b) Electrical gradient values for ERI data (log(Ω m −1 )/m). Darker pink represents increasing electrical gradient strength and while represents a weak electrical gradient.
The electrical gradient values were selected from the gradient grids where they correlate to  Laplacian  grids’ zero-crosses to define lithologic boundaries and structural features such as faults ( ;  ;  ;  ). Horizontal subsurface structures can be identified by horizontal zero-crosses and vertical zero-crosses indicate vertical subsurface structures (i.e. fractures, faults). Unfortunately, the literature is not extensive enough to provide predictive electrical gradient values for relevant lithologic boundaries and thus the authors defined ‘strong electrical gradient’ from the resulting modeled dataset . Most strong electrical gradients were located within the first 20 m below ground surface (bgs) of each survey. The strongest electrical gradients (>0.8 [log(Ω m −1 )/m]) coincided with the competent bedrock boundary in areas with thin to no epikarst (i.e. yellow cross in  ). Similar strong gradients (0.5 to 0.8 [log(Ω m −1 )/m]) were observed at depths along dissolution enhanced bedding planes and small karst features (i.e. electrically conductive features at depth). Weaker electrical gradients (<0.5 [log(Ω m −1 )/m]) were the predominant electrical gradient used to identify most lithologic boundaries and structures, including competent bedrock where epikarst and karst were thicker, as they were the relatively higher electrical gradients. In locations where little to no strong electrical gradient existed (i.e. yellow diamond in  ), the ER values described earlier were used to identify boundaries as prescribed in  . Data density decreases with depth, reducing the electrical gradient strength at depth thus electrical gradients were most useful to depths of 20 m bgs.
Depiction comparing two points along ERI survey EAR0408 of a strong electrical gradient (yellow cross) and a weak electrical gradient (yellow diamond). (a) ER data. (b) Laplacian zero-crosses (black line) over Gradient (pink; dark with higher gradient).
3.1. Soil cover
Overburden thickness (i.e. above the S-WB contact) was calculated from ground surface to the top of the epikarst at each electrode location, hand-picked from ERI data described previously and ranged from 0 to 15.2 m with an average of 3.8 m across the site. The locations within the site with the thinnest overburden lies in the south-central portion with little soil cover, which coincides with the highest elevations (dark blue, bottom of  ). The locations within the site with the thickest overburden lies in the central portion of the drainage area that runs east to west (gold, middle of  ).
According to National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil survey data, two different soil types exist between the thin, clay cover on the hill and a thicker, sand in the valley . Following precipitation events, the valley is a natural drainage feature that accumulates sediment over time. The clay-loam cover atop the hills has a much lower hydraulic conductivity, likely leading to runoff rather than infiltration during precipitation, while the sandy-loam has a higher hydraulic conductivity and greater recharge potential. The soil portion of the vadose zone provides significant storage potential. Thicker soils that transmit more water will have a significant impact on weathering potential of the epikarst through solutional enhancement of the fractures ( ;  ).
The S-WB contact was selected and extrapolated on each ERI survey as the top of epikarst at the site. The ER values of the soil cover are generally electrically conductive (0 to 100 Ω m −1 ). Zero-crosses correlated to strong electrical gradients at the S-WB contact  with an average gradient of 0.15 [log(Ω m −1 )/m]. However, electrical gradients diminished in areas with thick epikarst, and extensive weathering in zones affected by vertical fractures affected the orientation of zero-crosses reducing its usefulness for identifying the S-WB contact. The ER values of these areas indicate the likelihood of karstification and sediment infill. Where no strong gradient existed, ER values of 100 Ω m −1  were selected as the S-WB contact. The DP rig depth of refusal aided in confirmation of the soil overburden and the S-WB contact but was less reliable in fractured areas. The EC Array tool recorded resistivities to identify changes in lithology and to confirm ER data of ERI surveys in those locations (e.g. electrically conductive overburden, resistive and very resistive weathered bedrock;  ). Above the S-WB contact, more electrically conductive signatures were observed, and below the contact, resistivities were over 100 Ω m −1  and abruptly changed likely caused by the presence of rocky matrix.
Direct-Push Electrical Conductivity Array tool readings (in resistivity, Ω m −1 ) and ER values (Ω m −1 ) from corresponding locations along ERI surveys at eight different boring locations at the EAR site.
 shows the resistivities of the EC log (pink line) and smoothing of those measurements (purple line) used to more easily compare ERI data.   also depicts the resistivities of ERI surveys (blue, green, yellow, and orange lines) in locations adjacent to DP borings. The ERI data points were queried from the  XYZR  files. Although the resistivities for most of the borings consistently track ERI data, above and below 100 Ω m −1 , the overburden is not as clearly defined on each boring nor is it consistent across the EAR site (expected). Depth of refusal is the depth where the pink line terminates on each log but does not always correlate to where bedrock was encountered. For example, borings Sd06b and Sd06 were collected ∼1 m apart yet they produced different signatures at depth . Sd06b reached depth of refusal at the S-WB contact correlating to the ER value of 100 Ω m −1 . Conversely, Sd06 advanced more slowly than Sd06b, produced more stress on the drill string of the DP rig and produced significant resistivity beyond the S-WB interface. Borings Sd14 and Sd06 show much higher resistive values (>1000 Ω m −1 ) to a significant depth that would not support their use in confirming the S-WB contact. However, those two logs increase in resistivity with depth and their shapes become more jagged (i.e. abrupt changes in ER), indicative of the EC Array tool advancing along a fracture in the epikarst, both of which are likely at this site. Sd14 was collected along a suspected fracture exposed at the surface. Sd06 was collected where the potential for weathered bedrock existed. Ss05 was depicted as a shallow soil (e.g. <6 m) underlain by competent bedrock with very thin epikarst in the corresponding ERI survey and was the only unexplainable result as the soil boring extended twice as deep as expected, nearly 14 m, where no clear fracture exists.
 illustrates the correlation of EC log to ERI surveys. The Sd06b and Sd06 soil boring locations are indicated by brown lines in  .   parts b and c display the ERI resistivities and the strong electrical gradient with Laplacian zero-crosses, respectively, and   displays the EC log. As stated before, Sd06b reached a shallower depth of refusal that correlates here to the increase in ERI resistivity above 100 Ω m −1 . However, the strong electrical gradient is encountered before the depth of refusal, which could indicatea lithologic change froma course soil toa finer underlying soil. Soil boring Sd06 reached depth of refusal after the first strong electrical gradient was encountered and just before reaching a stronger electrical gradient much deeper. While the electrical gradient may not be telling in this location, the Laplacian zero-crosses indicate a strong likelihood for vertical fractures in this location. The ERI data at the 2-m scale clearly identify the fractures in the bedrock whereas the 4-m scale data do not. Characteristic, near surface, epikarst weathering zones consist of blocks of competent bedrock surrounded by soil infill. It is not uncommon for bedrock to be encountered at different depths only 1 m away .
ERI Survey EAR0408 with epikarst interpretations for (a) soil boring EC log and corresponding ER, (b) inset of soil boring over ERI, (c) inset of soil boring over zero-crosses and electrical gradient, (d) 2-m survey, (e) 4-m survey and (f) aerial map with ERI surveys (red crosses), EAR0408 (orange solid line) and inferred fractures (yellow dashed lines) (Ham Fault extension is bolded).
These findings explain why Sd06 advanced further than Sd06b, why both borings display an increase in resistivity at similar depths in ERI (e.g. at 100 Ω m −1 ) and the EC log, and the continued progression of the DP rig regardless of the increase in resistivity. ERI provides real utility in differentiating the soil overburden from the weathered bedrock. Additional characterization for the CSM could include comprehensive soils investigation and research on the microbial influence on the ER datasets in shallow karst settings.
3.2. Shallow karst
The same methods used to define the S-WB contact were used to define the base of the weathered bedrock (i.e. WB-CB contact) without DP confirmation. Laplacian zero-crosses correlated to strong electrical gradients at the WB-CB contact with an average gradient of 0.26 [log(Ω m −1 )/m]. However, some false Laplacian zero-crosses were generated due to artifacts and geology, and the electrical gradient decreased with depth due to reduced data density and thus was not as reliable. Uncertainty of the S-WB contact (as well as other contacts) increases without the ability to ground truth the data via DP equipment, Laplacian zero-crosses, or strong electrical gradient. Karst and epikarst landscapes introduce an additional level of uncertainty. Where no strong gradient existed, ER values of 1000 Ω m −1  were used to define the WB-CB contact. Highly resistive blocks (ER > 1000 Ω m −1 ) underlain by lower ER (<1000 Ω m −1 ) were interpreted as a continuation of epikarst zone and weathered bedrock (e.g. 0 to 30m from west;  ).
Extensive epikarst and karst features also exist in the images with resistivities that are electrically conductive to resistive . The electrical gradients coinciding with karst conduits and base of shallow epikarst had the strongest average gradient of 0.31 [log( Ω  m −1 )/m]. Where epikarst was thickest, this stronger to strongest gradient continued along highly resistive ER contours of 550 to 700 Ω m −1  atop slightly weathered or fractured blocks settled in the otherwise extensively weathered bedrock (e.g. 335 m elevation, 160 m from west;  ). Many of the strongest gradients at depth followed vertical, or nearly vertical, gradient contours and Laplacian zero-crosses interpreted to represent faults and karst conduits. Where there was thin epikarst, the stronger to strongest gradient followed the competent bedrock boundary (e.g. 140 m from west;  ). Although a thickness was not calculated for the epikarst, the resulting ERI images suggest zones of epikarst and karst over 20 m bgs.
Soil mantled epikarst have an extensive, relatively homogeneous weathering profile whereas karst features are more heterogenous weathered bedrock dissolved at depth ( ;  ).   illustrates a well-defined epikarst weathering profile to the west (40 to 100 m from west) along the ERI survey. A fracture-damaged zone is exhibited further to the east along the same survey (150 to 250 m from west) producing a more vertically extensive epikarst setting, and likely karst, meaning higher storage and transmission capabilities. Fracture-dominated weathering initiated at depth can expand the significant weathering profile into a doline . In the instance of  , the vertical electrically conductive signatures are potentially karstic, lined with microbial communities or filled with fine, water-bearing sediment, while the surrounding resistive signatures are the surrounding epikarst.
ERI successfully identified the depth to competent bedrock and electrically conductive signatures of preferential flow pathways of the epikarst and karst. While the epikarst can be identified by its weathering surface , the shape of karst features might appear as blobs or ‘windows’ in the image due to their orientation in relation to the ERI survey such as the area labeled ‘karst’ along the 4-m ERI survey between distances of 150 and 200 m . Karst signatures are often highly resistive against the surrounding bedrock considering their occurrence as void space filled with air, especially in the vadose zone. However, sediment- or fluid-filled karst and microbial biofilm coated karst can produce relatively conductive electrical signatures ( , Atekwana&  ). The EAR0412 survey in   was collected across the EAR sinkhole used for aquifer recharge to understand the connections from the sinkhole.   exhibits vertical, electrically conductive signatures directly beneath the EAR sinkhole while   shows vertically oriented Laplacian zero-crosses and gradients. The photographs in   and   also show the sinkhole itself, as well as highly fractured rock faces and thin laminar beds. Although the EAR sinkhole is relatively small for the overall ERI survey, the 4-m survey depicts flow pathways to the north and south. Biological tracers (fish) have been recorded in the well EAR1.
ERI Survey EAR0404 collected across the EAR sinkhole with (a) inset of ERI directly below the EAR sinkhole, (b) inset of Gradient and Laplacian grids directly below EAR sinkhole, (c) 2-m survey, (d) 4-m survey and (e) aerial map with ERI surveys (red crosses), EAR0404 (orange solid line) and inferred fractures (yellow dashed lines) (Ham Fault extension is bolded).
Regardless of size, karst features can transmit more water, faster, which greatly enhances the volume of recharge to an aquifer. For instance, the linear feature at 100 m along the EAR0408 survey  is probably a direct conduit solutionally enlarged from fractures extending to the EAR sinkhole. The ASA has characteristic high-angle faults that help drive epikarst and karst development . This was evident across all ERI results for the EAR site from which localized fractures and faults were mapped . A working hypothesis of EPA researchers in the ASA is that the mapped Ham Fault extends from the BMS to the EAR site rather than terminating between the two (as in  ). When we extend the Ham Fault to the EAR site, we see the damage zone and a zigzagging of faults intersect several ERI surveys before seemingly terminating at the on-site pond (between 150 and 200 m along EAR0408,  ; between 100 and 150 m along EAR0404,  ). Many localized fractures abut this fault to the southeast, similar to other regional faults. Fractures and faults of the EAR site identified through the ERI surveys trend roughly 56° and 134° from north . Surface runoff around the EAR site generally follows these trends. The zero-crosses were more useful for identifying faults and fractures within extensive damage zones as their orientations changed from horizontal to predominantly vertical. Small fractures in the less weathered bedrock were identified by their electrical gradient. Using ERI, the data illustrate how local, shallow fractures and karst likely connect to deeper regional faults and to identify flow pathways in carbonate bedrock ( ;  ).
EAR site with ERI surveys (red crosses), monitoring wells (black circles), sinkholes (yellow diamonds), EAR sinkhole (pink triangle) and localized fractures picked from ERI results (yellow dashed lines; Ham Fault Extension in larger, bolded dashed line).
ERI was used here to identify zones with the least resistance to groundwater flow. Additional work using transient ERI (TERI) surveys can provide a temporal aspect to the research and tracers, which can be indicated by ERI such as temperature or salinity, introduced at the EAR sinkhole can provide further detail on flow direction following recharge events. In addition, linking resistivity signatures to porosity values could produce a large-scale volumetric model of the subsurface at this site and quantify the storage capacity.
3.3. Flow zone connections
Saturation conditions and epikarst maturity greatly affect the hydraulic response following a precipitation event . Generally, porosity and permeability decrease with depth in the epikarst zone and water infiltrates quicker than it can drain during large precipitation events . However, a few properly placed faults and karst conduits may keep up with increasing overland flow volumes.
ERI identified a likely direct connection from the EAR sinkhole and the well EAR1 . Comparing this feature with other ERI surveys between the sinkhole and the well, we determined a fracture network links the two . Downhole video footage depicts open conduits in the vadose portion of the EAR1 wellbore. We also know well EAR1 appears to be directly connected to the EAR sinkhole as biological tracers (e.g. fish, tadpoles) were captured in downhole video footage.   demonstrates the change in lithology between likely karst conduits and bedrock from video footage and the comparison to the electrical images of ERI survey EAR0414. Of note, the EAR0414 survey was collected roughly 5 m away from the well EAR1, therefore the ERI comparison is representative but not an exact electrical signature. Two different depths, one karst feature (13.2 m bgs;  ) and one bedrock (20.8 m bgs;  ), correlate to different electrical signatures, electrically resistive and electrically highly resistive, respectively. The interpreted karst feature (13.2 m bgs) from the ERI survey at 330 m elevation and 130 m from the west  had visible sediment in the downhole footage collecting on bedding planes, which acted as shelves protruding from the damaged wellbore wall. Thus, the area near well EAR1 is labeled as karst due to the various conduits recorded in the downhole video and electrically resistive ERI values.
ERI survey EAR0414 collected 20 m south of the EAR sinkhole: (a) image from downhole video at 13.2 m, (b) image from downhole video at 20.8 m, (c) 2-m survey, (d) 4-m survey and (e) aerial map with ERI surveys (red crosses), EAR0408 (orange solid line) and inferred fractures (yellow dashed lines).
Electrical signatures of the previously discussed karst connection in   indicate the elevation as 320 m amsl. At this same elevation, the well EAR1 begins to encounter bedrock visible in the downhole footage. Connections from the EAR sinkhole to the well EAR1 likely only occur under large aquifer recharge events. The elevation of sinkhole is ∼340.5 m amsl and the elevation of the karst conduit in well EAR1  is 332.6 m amsl, therefore the link between the two include a horizontal as well as vertical component and only when the epikarst is relatively flooded. Understanding these connections is important to future research. Monitoring infiltration rates and groundwater elevations can help us understand when the epikarst storage may reach its maximum, potentially providing a volume for storage capacity. TERI surveys on newly mapped faults and fractures can improve modeling of groundwater flow, identifying the horizontal component of subsurface flow to the vertical component and further understanding of the shallow to deep groundwater connections.
4. Conclusion
This study investigated the hydraulic connection between shallow and deep groundwater by using ERI to identify potential flow pathways as well as understanding the storage mechanisms of the epikarst at an EAR site in Oklahoma. The results presented in this paper validate the effectiveness of ERI in characterizing karst/epikarst and delineating soil, bedrock and local faults and fractures in the subsurface. The EAR site plans to use a natural connection (i.e. sinkhole) to recharge the ASA with precipitation runoff, like many karst landscapes across the country, and to maximize the storage capacity of the karst and epikarst features.
Downhole video captured at well EAR-1 showed significant weathering and fracturing within the borehole and confirmed the presence of surficial biological tracers. Areas identified in the ERI surveys as the potential karst conduits correlated to the areas captured in the video. Alone, these indicated the potential for horizontal flow pathways between the EAR sinkhole and well EAR-1. Targeted DP borings helped determine depth to bedrock along ERI surveys. Twenty-eight ERI surveys characterized the soil, epikarst and competent bedrock. First and second derivatives of the ER datasets helped delineate the extensive karst and fracture network across the EAR site. Lower resistivity and electrically conductive signatures in the epikarst generally equate to areas of least resistance with greater porosity allowing the groundwater to flow less restricted than in the surrounding bedrock. Faults and fractures likely permit mostly vertical transport of groundwater from the shallow groundwater to deeper groundwater of the ASA. The 2D ERI surveys in   and   showed how the large regional fault (labeled Ham Fault Extension in figures) likely connects the EAR sinkhole and BMS. Thick portions of electrically conductive and low, resistive ER values in the ERI data indicate the thick weathering profile and significant storage potential of the epikarst.
After a thorough characterization of the likely storage and flow pathways using ERI, the datasets can be used to evaluate where we might place monitoring or recharge and production wells. Identifying the areas of greatest porosity are beneficial for identifying particularly difficult or easy drilling for the drillers and in selecting the screened interval of each given well. All the wells at the EAR site discussed in this paper were installed prior to data collection of the ERI surveys. Before the ERI characterization, the EAR concept applied to a karst setting is similar to black hole: water entering the EAR sinkhole disappeared and it was best guess as to where that water went. Similarly, it was a best guess as to the volume the sinkhole would accept. Following ERI characterization, we have located enhanced water conveyance structures of a karst aquifer to improve the design and operation of the EAR site. In general, the geophysical tools used at the EAR site refined the CSM and identified future research questions regarding EAR in karst.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Material
Supplemental Figure:  Direct-Push Electrical Conductivity Array tool readings (in resistivity, Ω m −1 ) and ER values (Ω m −1 ) from corresponding locations along ERI surveys at eight different boring locations at the EAR site.
Acknowledgements
The views expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views or the policies of the US Environmental Protection Agency. Any mention of trade names, manufacturers or products does not imply an endorsement by the United States Government or the US Environmental Protection Agency. EPA and its employees do not endorse any commercial products, services, or enterprises. This document has been reviewed in accordance with US Environmental Protection Agency policy and approved for publication.
Funding
This work was funded by U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (Safe and Sustainable Water Resources research program).
Footnotes
Supplementary data Supplementary data are available at the  Journal of Geophysics and Engineering  online.
Supplementary data
Supplementary data are available at the  Journal of Geophysics and Engineering  online.
Conflict of interest statement.  Todd Halihan has a financial interest in Aestus, LLC. An approved management plan is on file in OSU’s Office of University Research Compliance.
Conflict of interest statement.  Todd Halihan has a financial interest in Aestus, LLC. An approved management plan is on file in OSU’s Office of University Research Compliance.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES