Ect2-dependent rRNA synthesis is required for  KRAS / TP53 -driven lung adenocarcinoma
Verline Justilien
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Syed A. Ali
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Lee Jamieson
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Ning Yin
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Adrienne D. Cox
2 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Channing J. Der
2 Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
Nicole R. Murray
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Alan P. Fields
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Comprehensive Cancer Center, Jacksonville, FL, USA
Associated Data
SUMMARY
The guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) Epithelial Cell Transforming sequence 2 (Ect2) has been implicated in cancer. However, it is not clear how Ect2 causes transformation, and whether Ect2 is necessary for tumorigenesis in vivo. Here, we demonstrate that nuclear Ect2 GEF activity is required for  Kras-Trp53  lung tumorigenesis in vivo, and that Ect2-mediated transformation requires Ect2-dependent ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription. Ect2 activates rRNA synthesis by binding the nucleolar transcription factor Upstream Binding Factor 1 (UBF1) on rDNA promoters, and recruiting Rac1 and its downstream effector nucleophosmin (NPM) to rDNA. Protein kinase Cι (PKCι)-mediated Ect2 phosphorylation stimulates Ect2-dependent rDNA transcription. Thus, Ect2 regulates rRNA synthesis through a PKCι-Ect2-Rac1-NPM signaling axis that is required for lung tumorigenesis.
Graphical abstract

INTRODUCTION
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths globally . Lung adenocarcinoma (LADC), the most prevalent form of lung cancer, accounts for 40% of diagnoses . Activating  KRAS  mutations are the most frequent oncogenic LADC driver, occurring in ~30% of cases . We recently identified Epithelial cell transforming sequence 2 (Ect2), a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for Rho GTPases, as an oncogene in mutant  KRAS  LADC cells ( ;  ). Ect2 is overexpressed in LADC tumors and is required for transformed growth and invasion of LADC cells in vitro ( ;  ).
Ect2 regulates cytokinesis in non-transformed cells by activating RhoA ( ;  ). During interphase, Ect2 is predominantly nuclear, where it is thought to be inactive, sequestered away from cytoplasmic RhoA . Mitotic nuclear envelope breakdown allows Ect2 to associate with the mitotic spindle . In lung cancer cells, a pool of Ect2 becomes mislocalized to the cytoplasm where it associates with the PKCι-Par6 complex and participates in transformed growth by activating Rac1, a process distinct from its role in cytokinesis . More recently we demonstrated that nuclear Ect2 participates in transformed growth of ovarian cancer cells . However, neither the molecular mechanism(s) by which nuclear Ect2 participates in oncogenesis, nor a role for Ect2 in tumorigenesis in vivo has been elucidated. Here, we investigate the involvement of Ect2 in  Kras-Trp53 -mediated lung tumorigenesis.
RESULTS
Ect2 is required for  Kras-Trp53  mediated lung tumor formation
Ect2 is necessary for transformed growth of human LADC cells ( ;  ) but its role in LADC tumorigenesis in vivo is unknown. Therefore, we crossed conditional Ect2 knockout ( Ect2 fl/fl )  and  LSL-Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl  (K,P)  mice to generate tri-transgenic K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice, and initiated lung tumorigenesis by intratracheal instillation of adenovirus expressing Cre-recombinase (Ad-Cre) as described previously . K,P mice exhibited a mean survival of 121 days whereas K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice lived significantly longer (177 days) . Histologic analysis revealed that K,P mice develop numerous LADC tumors, whereas K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice exhibited fewer tumors  and decreased tumor burden . Tumor progression, assessed at survival endpoint, was not significantly different in K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors  and no evidence for gender effects was observed . A similar decrease in tumor number and burden was observed in K, Ect2 fl/fl  mice compared to K mice indicating Ect2 function is not dependent on  Trp53  loss .
( A ) Effect of genetic loss of  Ect2  on survival from  LSL-Kras G12D / Trp53 fl/fl  (K,P) lung tumors. Kaplan-Meier analysis of K,P, K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  and P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice. n=25/genotype, *p<0.0001 compared to K,P mice. ( B ) Representative images of H&E-stained lung sections. Tumor size ( C ) and tumor burden ( D ) were assessed in K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice 10 weeks after tumor initiation. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=8/genotype; *p<0.003 compared to K,P mice. ( E ) PCR of DNA from K,P,Ect2 f1/f1  tumors for recombination of  LSL-Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl/fl  and  Ect2 fl/fl  alleles. ( F ) QPCR of K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  lung tumors for Ect2 mRNA. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5; no significant differences were observed between K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors. ( G ) Immunohistochemical staining of K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors for Ect2. Representative images are shown.  See also  .
PCR of DNA from microdissected K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors revealed recombination of the  LSL-Kras G12D  allele and both  Trp53 fl/fl  alleles, but incomplete recombination of the  Ect2 fl/fl  alleles . QPCR of RNA from K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  lung tumor cells revealed no significant difference in Ect2 mRNA expression , and immunohistochemistry confirmed that K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors express similar Ect2 protein levels . Thus, each K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumor examined harbored an unrecombined  Ect2  allele and expressed abundant Ect2, indicating that  Kras/Trp53 -mediated lung tumorigenesis in vivo requires Ect2.
Ect2 drives transformed growth of  Kras/Trp53  lung tumor initiating cells ex vivo
Tumors contain highly tumorigenic stem-like tumor-initiating cells (TICs) that drive tumor initiation, maintenance, relapse and metastasis ( ;  ;  ;  ). The inability of K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice to form tumors suggests that  Ect2  loss may impact the tumorigenicity of LADC TICs. CD24 + /ITGB4 + /NOTCH3 hi  (3+) lung epithelial cells correspond to a TIC population in K,P LADC . K,P 3+ cells comprise ~8% of the total K,P tumor cell population  and exhibit enhanced growth as transformed oncospheres compared to the total K,P tumor cell population . Lentiviral shRNA-mediated knockdown (KD) of Ect2 using two mouse-specific Ect2 shRNAs  significantly inhibited oncosphere formation in K,P 3+ cells ex vivo . Interestingly, 3+ cells are present in K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumors (K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  3+ cells) at a similar frequency to K,P 3+ cells , and exhibit oncosphere growth comparable to K,P 3+ cells . This result was not unexpected since K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  tumor cells retain an unrecombined  Ect2  allele and express abundant Ect2 RNA and protein (see  ). However, Ad-Cre treatment of K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  3+ cells ex vivo led to efficient recombination of the remaining Ect2 allele , and a corresponding loss of Ect2 mRNA  and oncosphere formation , similar to that observed after Ect2 KD in K,P 3+ cells . Thus, either Ect2 KD or genetic  Ect2  ablation blocks tumorigenic growth of K,P 3+ cells ex vivo, reflecting the inability of K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice to develop tumors in vivo.
( A ) Population frequency analysis of CD24 + /ITGB4 + /NOTCH3 hi  (3+) tumor-initiating cells isolated from K,P lung tumors. ( B ) Growth of total lung epithelial cells and K,P 3+ cells in Matrigel. Single cell suspensions of total epithelial and K,P 3+ cells were plated in Matrigel and oncospheres were quantitated after 2 weeks ( C ). Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=9. *p<1×10 −13  compared to total lung epithelial cells. ( D ) Effect of Ect2 KD on K,P 3+ cell growth. K,P 3+ cells transduced with mouse-specific Ect2 shRNAs or non-target control shRNA lentivirus were plated in Matrigel and assessed for oncosphere formation. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=10. *p<1 ×10 −6  compared to NT control. ( E ) Representative images of oncospheres. ( F ) and ( G ) K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  3+ cells were treated with Ad-Cre ex vivo and assessed for Ect2 mRNA ( F ) and oncosphere formation ( G ). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=9. *p<3×10 −6  ( F ) and *p<0.0003 ( G ) compared to no Cre.  See also  .
Nuclear Ect2 GEF activity is required for LADC tumorigenesis
Ect2 localizes predominantly to the nucleus of non-transformed cells  presumably in an auto-inhibited state sequestered away from cytoplasmic Rho GTPases . However, we recently showed that nuclear Ect2 GEF activity is necessary for transformed growth of ovarian cancer cells . We therefore generated a GEF-deficient Ect2 mutant (DH mut  Ect2) (E428A and N608A within the Dbl homology (DH) domain); and NLS mut  Ect2 (five key arginine residues in the Ect2 NLS changed to alanines; R348,349,350,370,372A)  . Expression of HA-tagged wild-type (WT), DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 in A549 human LADC cells harboring oncogenic  KRAS  mutation revealed that WT and DH mut  Ect2 are predominantly nuclear, whereas NLS mut  Ect2 is largely cytoplasmic by immunofluorescence  and cellular fractionation . To assess function, we knocked down endogenous Ect2 using a previously characterized Ect2 shRNA, and expressed HA-tagged WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 cDNAs made resistant to Ect2 KD to levels similar to endogenous Ect2 as described previously  . As expected ( ;  ) Ect2 KD inhibited soft agar growth that was restored by WT Ect2, but not by DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 . Similar results were observed in two other human mutant  KRAS  LADC cell lines (H358 and H23) , and in K,P 3+ cells .
( A ) Schematic of WT, GEF-deficient (DH mut ) and nuclear localization sequence-deficient (NLS mut ) mutants. ( B ) Immunofluorescent localization of HA-tagged WT, DH mut  and NLS mut  Ect2 in transfected A549 cells using HA antibody. ( C ) A549 cells transfected with HA-tagged WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 were fractionated into cytoplasm ( C ) and nucleus ( N ) and subjected to immunoblot analysis for HA-Ect2. Lamin A/C and MEK1 served as nuclear and cytoplasmic protein controls. ( D ) Expression of HA-Ect2 mutant alleles in Ect2 KD cells. A549 Ect2 KD cells stably transfected with HA control vector (Vec), or WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 were subjected to immunoblot analysis for total Ect2 and HA-Ect2. Actin served as a loading control. ( E ) Effect of Ect2 KD and Ect2 alleles on transformed growth. NT cells served as positive control. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5. *p <0.0006 compared to NT cells; **p<0.002 compared to Vec. QPCR of mouse Ect2 ( F ) and reconstitution with human Ect2 mutant cDNAs ( G ) in K,P 3+ cells. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<5×10 −6  compared to NT. Effect of expressing WT Ect2, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 on oncosphere formation in Ect2 KD K,P 3+ cells ex vivo ( H ) and tumor growth in vivo ( I  and  J ). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; ( H ) n=9. *p<3 × 10 −13  compared to NT; ** p<3 × 10 −11  compared to Vec; ( I ) n=10, *p <6×10 −5  compared to NT; and ( J ) The tops and bottoms of the boxes indicate the 75th and 25th percentiles respectively; lines within the boxes indicate the median; lines above and below the boxes indicate the 95th and 5th percentiles respectively. n=10, *p <0.0003 compared to NT; **p<0.002 compared to Vec.  See also  .
A hallmark of LADC TICs is their ability to initiate tumors in vivo. Consistent with their TIC phenotype, K,P 3+ cells generated tumors histologically similar to K,P tumors . To assess the role of Ect2 in K,P 3+ cell tumor formation in vivo, we injected 3+ Ect2KD cells expressing empty vector, or WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 into the flanks of non-transgenic syngeneic mice. Ect2 KD inhibited K,P 3+ cell-derived tumor formation , and WT Ect2 reconstituted tumor growth whereas DH mut  and NLS mut  Ect2 did not . Thus, K,P 3+ cells require nuclear Ect2 GEF activity for transformed growth ex vivo, and tumor formation in vivo.
Nuclear Ect2 is dispensable for cytokinesis
Previous work suggested that the roles of Ect2 in cytokinesis and transformation are distinct . To directly test this hypothesis, we knocked down Ect2 and re-expressed either empty vector or shRNA-resistant WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells as previously described  . As expected , Ect2 KD impaired cytokinesis, leading to an accumulation of multinucleated cells; whereas exogenous WT Ect2 rescued this cytokinesis defect, DH mut  Ect2 did not rescue, confirming that Ect2 GEF activity is required for cytokinesis . Interestingly, NLS mut  Ect2, which does not support transformed growth of LADC cells , rescued cytokinesis in Ect2 KD MDCK cells. Thus, nuclear Ect2 is required for transformed growth but not cytokinesis.
( A ) Immunoblot of Ect2KD MDCK cells transduced with HA-tagged control vector or WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 for total Ect2, HA-Ect2 and actin. ( B ) Effect of expressing WT, NLS mut  Ect2, and DH mut  Ect2 mutants on cytokinesis (multinucleated cells) in Ect2 KD MDCK cells. Staining for phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ). ( C ) Quantification of multinucleated cells. Results represent % multinucleated cells +/− SEM. n >1000 cells from each cell type; *p<3×10 −21  compared to NT cells. **p<5×10 −12  compared to Vec cells. ( D, E  and  F ) Effect of Ect2 genetic loss on cytokinesis. Primary lung epithelial cells from NTg, Ect2 fl/fl , K,P or K,P,Ect2  fl/fl  mice were infected with Ad-Cre ex vivo and plated in Matrigel. Seven days post infection, cells were analyzed for recombination of  Kras G12D , Trp53  and  Ect2  alleles by PCR ( D ), Ect2 mRNA by QPCR ( E ), and multinucleated cells ( F ). Results in ( E ) represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.0002 compared to NTg; **p<0.001 compared to NTg. Results in ( F ) represent the mean +/− SEM; at least 1200 cells scored for each genotype. *p<5×10 −8  compared to NTg.
We next assessed if the effect of Ect2 loss on K,P tumor formation is due to a cytokinesis defect. Lung epithelial cells from non-transgenic (NTg), Ect2 fl/fl , K,P or K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice were infected with Ad-Cre to activate the  Kras G12D  allele, and inactivate the  Trp53 fl/fl  and  Ect2 fl/fl  alleles as confirmed by PCR analysis . Ad-Cre led to a significant increase in Ect2 mRNA in K,P cells , consistent with the elevated Ect2 observed in LADC cell lines and primary LADC tumors . In contrast, Cre-induced genetic  Ect2  ablation resulted in loss of Ect2 mRNA in Ect2 fl/fl  and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  cells . Ect2 loss caused an accumulation of multi-nucleated cells in Ect2 fl/fl  cells compared to NTg cells , but not in K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  cells compared to K,P cells . Thus, Ect2 loss induces a cytokinesis defect in non-transformed mouse lung epithelial cells but not in transformed K,P cells consistent with previous publications suggesting that Ect2 transforming activity is uncoupled from cytokinesis ( ;  ).
Nuclear Ect2 associates with ribosomal processing proteins
We next immunoprecipitated nuclear Ect2 from A549 cells and identified associated proteins by mass spectrometry . KEGG pathway analysis revealed enrichment in proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis , and particularly in ribosomal DNA (rDNA) transcription and processing . Interrogation of the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) human LADC dataset (517 tumors) revealed significant co-expression of Ect2 with a majority (162/286) of genes critical to ribosome biogenesis  . This association was significantly stronger for Ect2 than other Rho GEFs ( ; see also  ), indicating a selective involvement of Ect2 in ribosome biogenesis. Similar results were obtained when only mutant  KRAS  LADC tumors were analyzed . QPCR analysis of RNA from archived mutant  KRAS  LADC cases (n=19) revealed a significant positive correlation (R 2 =0.72) between Ect2 mRNA and 45S pre-ribosomal RNA, a direct measure of rDNA transcription . Kaplan-Meier analysis of the LADC TCGA dataset revealed that Ect2 expression is associated with decreased disease-free and overall survival , indicating the clinical relevance of Ect2 signaling in LADC.
( A ) Co-occurrence analysis of the TCGA LADC dataset (n=517) for expression of ribosomal processing genes and Rho family GEFs. Significant co-occurences shown in  red  and exclusivity in  blue . (B) Scatter plot showing the correlation between Ect2 mRNA and 45S rRNA in primary mutant  KRAS  LADC tumors (N=19). ( C ) Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy of A549 cells for UBF1 ( red ) and Ect2 ( green ). Merge image indicates nucleolar co-localization. Dotted line indicates nuclear boundary; Solid rectangles in upper panels indicates area shown at higher magnification in lower panels. Arrowheads indicate areas of UBF-Ect2 co-localization. ( D ) Nuclear extracts from A549 cells were immunoprecipitated for Ect2 ( right panel ) or UBF1 ( left panel ), or control IgG. Lysates ( Input ) and immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted for UBF1 and Ect2. ( E ) ChIP-reChIP analysis using sequential UBF1 and Ect2 antibody. UBF and Ect2 binding to rDNA was assessed using 7 primer sets spanning the rDNA repeat ( inset ). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. ( F ) ChIP-reChIP of NT and Ect2 KD A549 cells expressing vector, WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 for binding to rDNA promoter regions (primers 1, 6 and 7). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.006 compared to NT; **p<0.009 compared to Vec. ( G ) QPCR of NT and Ect2 KD A549 cells expressing the indicated Ect2 mutant for 45S pre-rRNA. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<2 × 10 −6  compared to NT; **p<0.0002 compared to Vec.  See also   and  .
Confocal immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a significant pool of Ect2 co-localizing with Upstream Binding Factor 1 (UBF1), the major rDNA transcription factor, within the nucleolus in A549 cells . Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells . Immunogold electron microscopy confirmed nucleolar Ect2 localization , and reciprocal immunoprecipitations validated that endogenous UBF1 and Ect2 directly interact . Similar results were observed in H23 and H358 cells . Interestingly, Ect2 binding to UBF1 was not detected in nuclear extracts from non-transformed lung epithelial cells  suggesting this interaction is preferentially present in LADC cells.
Ect2 regulates rRNA synthesis
UBF1 binds rDNA to regulate rDNA transcription . ChIP on ChIP assays revealed Ect2-UBF1 complexes that were most abundant near the rDNA promoter and transcriptional start site ( , primers 1, 6 and 7). Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells . ChIP analysis of NT and Ect2 KD cells expressing WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 revealed preferential binding of WT Ect2, but not DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2, to rDNA . Similar results were observed in H358 cells .
QPCR showed a decrease in 45S pre-rRNA in Ect2 KD cells that is restored by expression of WT but not DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 . Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells , and in K,P 3+ cells . Thus, nuclear Ect2 regulates rDNA transcription in human and mouse LADC cells.
Rac1 is a critical effector of nuclear Ect2
Ect2 is a GEF for Rac1, Cdc42 and RhoA . Cellular fractionation revealed that RhoA and Rac1 localized to both the cytoplasm and nucleus of A549 cells, whereas Cdc42 was exclusively cytoplasmic , consistent with published results ( ;  ). Similar results were observed in H358 and H23 cells . Mass spectrometry detected Rac1, but not RhoA, in nuclear Ect2 immunoprecipitates . Thus we expressed a nucleotide-free Rac1 mutant that tightly binds GEFs (FLAG-G15A-Rac1), and immunoprecipitated it from nuclear extracts of A549 cells. Immunoblot analysis revealed that Ect2 directly binds nuclear Rac1 . Pulldown assays revealed that Ect2 KD decreased active, GTP-bound nuclear Rac1 which is restored by expression of WT but not DH mut  nor NLS mut  Ect2 ( , upper panel). This effect was Rac1-specific since nuclear RhoA activity was uneffected ( , lower panel). Similar results were observed in H358 and H23 cells . The inability of NLS mut  Ect2 to activate nuclear Rac1 was not due a lack of Ect2 GEF activity since this mutant, like WT Ect2, led to an increase in active cytoplasmic Rac1, whereas the DH mut  Ect2 did not .
( A ) Immunoblot of cytoplasmic ( C ) and nuclear ( N ) A549 cell extracts for Rac1, RhoA and Cdc42. Lamin A/C and Mek1 serve as nuclear and cytoplasmic markers respectively. ( B ) Nuclear extracts expressing either empty control Vector ( Vec ) or FLAG-tagged Rac1 G15A  were immunoprecipitated with FLAG antibody and immunoblotted for Ect2. ( C ) Nuclear extracts from NT and Ect2 KD cells expressing Vec, WT, DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 were analyzed for active, GTP-bound and total Rac1 and RhoA. ( D ) ChIP-reChIP assays using UBF1 and Rac1 antibodies for rDNA binding. Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. ( E ) ChIP analysis of Rac1 binding to rDNA in NT, and Ect2 KD cells expressing Ect2 mutants. Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.0007 compared to NT; **p<3×10 −5  compared to Vec. ( F ) Effect of Rac1 RNAi constructs on Rac1 expression ( inset ) and 45S pre-rRNA in A549 cells. Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.05. ( G ) Effect of Rac1 KD on soft agar growth. Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5. *p<4×10 −7  compared to NT. ( H ) Effect of constitutively active Rac1 (caRac1;  inset ) on 45S rDNA in Ect2 KD cells. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p< 0.002 compared to NT; **p< 0.004 compared to Vec. ( I ) Effect of constitutively active Rac1 on soft agar growth in Ect2 KD cells. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5. *p < 8.5×10 −9  compared to NT cells; **p<2×10 −7  compared to Vec.  See also  .
We next assessed whether Rac1, like Ect2, associates with UBF1 on rDNA repeats. ChIP on ChIP assays for UBF1 and Rac1 revealed Rac1 associated with UBF1 at the rDNA promoter and transcriptional start site . Similar results were observed in H358 and H23 cells . ChIP analysis revealed that Rac1 binding is inhibited by Ect2 KD and rescued by expression of WT Ect2, but not DH mut  or NLS mut  Ect2 . Thus, Rac1 binds rDNA in an Ect2-, UBF1-dependent manner. Similar results were obtained in H358 cells .
We next determined if Rac1 is required for rDNA transcription and transformed growth. Rac1 KD using two lentiviral shRNAs significantly decreased 45S rRNA  and soft agar growth . Furthermore, expression of a constitutively active Rac1 allele, caRac1, in Ect2 KD cells rescued 45S rRNA levels and soft agar growth . Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells . Thus, Ect2 stimulates rDNA transcription by recruiting and activating Rac1 on rDNA.
Nucleophosmin (NPM) mediates nucleolar Ect2-Rac1 signaling
The nucleolar protein nucleophosmin (NPM; also known as B23) binds rDNA promoters and remodels ribosomal chromatin to activate rDNA transcription . NPM also binds Rac1 and may act as a chaperone for active nuclear Rac1 . Our proteomics identified NPM in nuclear Ect2 immunoprecipitates . Given the potential link between NPM and Rac1-dependent rRNA synthesis, we validated that NPM binds Rac1 in A549 cells using reciprocal immunoprecipitation . Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells . NPM KD inhibited 45S rRNA synthesis  and soft agar growth . Similar results were obtained in H358 and H23 cells . ChIP analysis revealed that: 1) NPM binds rDNA, 2) both Rac1 and Ect2 KD inhibit NPM binding to rDNA, and 3) caRac1 rescues NPM binding to rDNA in Ect2 KD cells . Similar results were obtained in H358 cells . Thus, NPM is recruited to rDNA in an Ect2-, Rac1-dependent fashion and is a critical effector of Ect2-,Rac1-mediated rDNA transcription and transformed growth. Furthermore, UBF1 KD ( , inset) inhibits Ect2, Rac1 and NPM binding to rDNA . Similar results were obtained in H358 cells .
( A ) Reciprocal immunoprecipitations using NPM and Rac1 antibodies. ( B ) Effect of NPM RNAi constructs on NPM expression ( inset ) and 45S rRNA. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.009 compared to NT. ( C ) Effect of NPM KD on soft agar growth. Data represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5. *p < 5×10 −7  compared to NT. ( D ) Effect of Rac1 and Ect2 KD, and expression of caRac1 on NPM binding to rDNA (primer set 7). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p< 5×10 −7  compared to NT; **p< 0.002 compared to Vec. ( E ) Effect of UBF1 KD ( inset ) on binding of UBF1, Ect2, Rac1 and NPM to rDNA (primer set 7). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.001 compared to corresponding NT for each ChIP antibody.  See also  .
PKCι-mediated phosphorylation regulates ECT2-dependent rRNA synthesis
PKCι phosphorylates Ect2 on Thr328 to regulate Ect2-dependent LADC transformation . Thus, we expressed WT Ect2, and the phospho-Ect2 mutants T328A and T328D in Ect2 KD cells . Cellular fractionation revealed that all three Ect2 alleles localize predominantly to the nucleus as expected . Ect2 KD caused a decrease in 45S rRNA synthesis that could be rescued by WT Ect2 or T328D Ect2 but not T328A Ect2 . Moreover, Ect2 KD led to a decrease in Ect2 , Rac1  and NPM  binding to rDNA that was efficiently rescued by WT Ect2 or T328D Ect2 but only weakly by T328A Ect2. Consistent with these results, WT and T328D Ect2 efficiently bound UBF1, whereas T328A Ect2 exhibited decreased UBF1 binding . Functionally, WT and T328D Ect2 restored soft agar growth in Ect2 KD cells whereas T328A Ect2 did not . Similar results were observed in H358 and H23 cells . Thus, PKCι-mediated Ect2 phosphorylation stimulates 45S rDNA transcription by facilitating binding of Ect2 to UBF1, and subsequent recruitment of Rac1 and NPM to rDNA.
( A ) Immunoblot of Ect2 KD and expression of S-peptide tagged WT Ect2, T328A Ect2 and T328D Ect2 mutants in A549 cells. Actin served as a loading control. ( B ) Immunoblot of S-peptide tagged Ect2 alleles in cytoplasmic ( C ) and nuclear ( N ) fractions of A549 cells. MEK1 and Lamins A/C serve as markers of cytoplasm and nucleus respectively. ( C-F ) Effect of Ect2 KD and expression of WT, T328A and T328D Ect2 mutants on 45S rRNA ( C ), and on binding of Ect2 ( D ), Rac1 ( E ) and NPM ( F ) to rDNA (primer set 7). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p< 0.03 compared to NT; **p< 0.02 compared to Vec. ( G ) Binding of WT, T328A Ect2 and T328D Ect2 to UBF1 was assessed by immunoprecipitation/immunoblot analysis. ( H ) Effect of Ect2 KD and expression of WT, T328A Ect2 and T328D Ect2 on soft agar growth. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=5. *p<3×10 −8  compared to NT; **p<4×10 −7  compared to Vec. ( I ) Effect of ANF on binding of Ect2, Rac1 and NPM to rDNA (primer set 7). Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p<0.002 compared to corresponding DMSO control for each ChIP antibody. ( J ) Effect of ANF on 45S rRNA in NT, and Ect2 KD cells expressing WT Ect2, T328D Ect2 or caRac1. Results represent the mean +/− SEM; n=3. *p< 0.05 compared to NT treated with DMSO; **p< 0.05 compared to WT treated with ANF.  See also  .
The anti-rheumatoid agent auranofin (ANF), a selective inhibitor of oncogenic PKCι signaling, inhibits LADC transformed growth ex vivo and tumor formation in vivo ( ;  ;  ;  ). Consistent these data, ANF also exhibits does-dependent inhibition of transformed growth of K,P tumor cells . Furthermore, ANF treatment inhibited T328 phosphorylation of nuclear Ect2 , binding of Ect2, Rac1 and NPM to rDNA , and 45S RNA transcription . As expected, Ect2 KD inhibited 45S rRNA, and ANF had no further inhibitory effect in Ect2 KD cells . Interestingly, expression of WT Ect2 in Ect2 KD cells restored 45S rRNA and sensitivity to ANF-mediated 45S rRNA inhibition, whereas expression of T328D Ect2 or constitutive active Rac1 restored 45S rRNA and conferred resistance to the effects of ANF . Thus, ANF inhibits 45S rRNA by inhibiting Ect2 phosphorylation and subsequent Ect2-, Rac1-dependent rDNA transcription. Consistent with the requisite role of enhanced rDNA transcription in transformed growth, the RNA polymerase I inhibitor CX-5461 exhibited dose-dependent inhibition of transformed growth of A549 cells . CX-5461- and ANF-induced growth inhibition is associated with comparable ~50% decreases in 45S rRNA , demonstrating that inhibition of 45S rRNA is sufficient to account for the growth inhibitory effects of CX-5461, ANF and genetic disruption of nuclear Ect2 signaling.
DISCUSSION
Ect2 is an oncogenic Rho GEF originally identified as a transforming gene in fibroblasts . The original transforming Ect2 clone lacked the N-terminal regulatory domain, and like other Dbl family GEFs, expression of this truncated Ect2 mutant resulted in aberrant, constitutive Ect2 GEF activity capable of cellular transformation . Full length Ect2 contains two nuclear localization signals (NLSs) that cause a predominantly nuclear localization in interphase cells . During mitosis, Ect2 distributes throughout the cytoplasm, and at cytokinesis localizes to the cleavage furrow where it activates RhoA-mediated scission . Early dogma was that nuclear Ect2 was auto-inhibited and physically sequestered from predominantly cytoplasmic GTPases . However, we recently reported that nuclear Ect2 GEF activity is required for transformed growth of ovarian cancer cells . Here, we validate and extend these observations, and establish that nuclear Ect2-mediated rDNA transcription is required for LADC transformation.
Previous studies suggested that the role of Ect2 in transformation is distinct from its role in cytokinesis ( ;  ). Ect2 KD does not induce a cytokinesis defect, despite inhibiting transformed growth of LADC, ovarian and fibrosarcoma cells ( ;  ;  ). Our present data demonstrate that nuclear Ect2 is not necessary for cytokinesis in non-transformed cells, but is required for transformed growth of LADC cells. Furthermore, genetic deletion of Ect2 in non-transformed mouse lung epithelial cells results in accumulation of multi-nucleated cells indicative of a cytokinesis defect whereas Ect2 deletion in  Kras/Trp53 -transformed mouse lung epithelial cells inhibits transformed growth ex vivo without inducing a cytokinesis defect. Thus, the roles of Ect2 in cellular transformation and cytokinesis are distinct and separable. Whereas Ect2 activates RhoA during cytokinesis, nuclear Ect2 activates Rac1 in LADC cells to activate rDNA transcription. These results argue that  Kras-Trp53 -transformed lung epithelial cells have lost their requirement for Ect2-dependent cytokinesis, consistent with similar observations in human LADC cells ( ;  ), ovarian  and fibrosarcoma  cells.
Our proteomics analysis indicated a role for Ect2 in ribosome biogenesis, a notion validated through biochemical and genetic analysis. Increased ribosome biogenesis is a common feature of transformed cells, which required elevated ribosome biosynthesis to support growth . Ribosome biogenesis involves the synthesis, processing and assembly of rRNA into ribosomal subunits. Cancer cells exhibiting elevated rDNA transcription are sensitive to the growth inhibitory effects of the Polymerase I inhibitor CX-5461 , a finding confirmed here in K,P tumor cells. Regulation of rDNA transcription has been linked to the oncogenic drivers c-MYC, PI3K and RAS ; for instance, c-MYC transformation requires c-Myc binding to the Pol I transcription machinery and elevated rDNA transcription . Interestingly, rDNA transcription is negatively regulated by p53 , further linking increased rDNA transcription and malignant transformation. Though increased ribosome synthesis plays a direct causative role in cellular transformation, the mechanistic link(s) between rDNA transcription and cancer are not well understood. Our data demonstrate that oncogenic nuclear Ect2 regulates rDNA transcription in LADC cells, and that Ect2-dependent rDNA transcription is required for LADC transformation. Ect2 binds UBF1, the major rDNA transcription factor, at the rDNA promoter, and Ect2 KD inhibits rDNA transcription. GEF-deficient Ect2 exhibits decreased UBF1 binding and is unable to reconstitute rDNA transcription in Ect2 KD cells underscoring the importance of Ect2 GEF activity in rDNA transcription. We find that Rac1 is the critical effector of Ect2 in rDNA transcription. Like Ect2, Rac1 associates with UBF1 on rDNA promoters, and Rac1 KD decreases rDNA transcription. Although nuclear Rac1 has been implicated in DNA damage response and RNA polymerase II-mediated transcription (reviewed in , our data demonstrate an additional role for Rac1 in rDNA transcription. Ect2-activated Rac1 recruits NPM to rDNA and stimulates rDNA transcription. Our data are consistent with a model in which Ect2 binds UBF1 on rDNA promoters and recruits and activates Rac1 to drive rRNA synthesis by regulating the interaction of active Rac1 with NPM. Interestingly, PKCι-mediated Ect2 phosphorylation, which is required for oncogenic Ect2 function, regulates binding of Ect2 to UBF1, subsequent binding of Rac1 and NPM to rDNA, and rDNA transcription. Furthermore, the PKCι inhibitor ANF blocks Ect2 phosphorylation and Ect2-, Rac1-dependent rDNA transcription. These data provide a clinical rationale for the use of ANF to target the Ect2-Rac1-NPM signaling axis for treatment of  KRAS- driven LADC.
Ect2 is overexpressed in many tumor types ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ) and is required for transformed growth of many cancer cell types in vitro (reviewed in . However, the importance of Ect2 in tumor formation in vivo was unknown. We establish that Ect2 is required for LADC tumor initiation and maintenance of a LADC TIC phenotype. Ect2 loss in  Kras G12D /Trp53  mice leads to a profound loss of lung tumor formation that can be traced to a defect in TIC function. Ect2 loss also decreases rDNA transcription in  Kras G12D /Trp53 -transformed lung TICs, indicating that Ect2-dependent rDNA transcription is intimately linked to the tumorigenic potential of Ect2. Our data provide mechanistic insight into Ect2-dependent transformation, enhance our understanding of the initiating events in  Kras -mediated lung tumorigenesis, and establish PKCι-Ect2-Rac1-NPM signaling as a viable therapeutic target.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Antibodies and cell lines
Antibodies: Ect2 (Millipore, Billerica MA, USA), RhoA, NPM1 and UBF1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA); Rac1 and Cdc42 (BD Transduction Labs, San Jose, CA, USA); HA, β-actin, MEK1 and Lamin A/C (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA); FLAG (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA); Phalloidin-Alexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen, Life Technologies Carlsbad, CA, USA). CD24-PerCp-eFluor®710 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA USA), Notch3-Alexa-Fluor®647 (Biolegend, San Diego, CA USA), and ITGB4-PE (Abcam, Cambridge, MA 02139-1517, USA). S-peptide monoclonal antibody and expression plasmid were a gift from Dr. S. Kaufmann, Mayo Clinic. The pT328-Ect2 antibody was described previously . A549, H358, H23, BEAS-2B and MDCK cells were from the American Type Culture Collection ( Manassas, VA, USA).
Generation of  LSL-Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl ;Ect2 fl/fl  mice and Ad-Cre intratracheal instillations
LSL-Kras G12D  and  Trp53 fl/fl  mice were mated to generate  LSL-Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl  (K,P) mice. K,P mice were mated to floxed  Ect2  mice ( Ect2 fl/fl )  to generate K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice. Non-transgenic (NTg),  Ect2 fl/fl  and  Trp53 fl/fl ;Ect2 fl/fl  littermates served as controls. Mice (6–10 weeks old) were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine, intubated intratracheally and instilled with two 50-µL aliquots of adenovirus-Cre recombinase (1.5×10 8  PFU/mL) (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) as described previously . All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Mayo Clinic.
Survival study
Animals were inspected daily for health and moribund animals were euthanized by CO 2  asphyxiation for necropsy. Criteria for euthanasia were based on independent veterinary assessment using AAALAC guidelines; animals in a condition considered incompatible with continued survival were considered deaths. Animals removed at sacrifice or found dead with confirmed lung tumors were considered as censored deaths.
Histology and immunohistochemistry
Mice were sacrificed, exsanguinated, and lungs processed for histologic and immunohistochemical analysis as previously described . Mouse Ect2 was visualized using an Ect2 antibody and the Envision Plus Dual Labeled Polymer Kit following the instructions of the manufacturer (DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA). Slide images were captured and analyzed using a ScanScope scanner and ImageScope software (Aperio Technologies, Buffalo Grove, IL).
LSL-Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl/fl , and  Ect2 fl/fl  allele status
Allele status was determined by PCR as described ( ;  ) using the primers listed in  .
Primary lung epithelial cell Isolation
Tumor tissue was dissected from Ad-Cre-instilled K,P or K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice or total lung from Nt, Ect2 fl/fl  K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice and processed for lung epithelial cell isolation as previously described .
FACS analysis
CD24+/ITGB4+/NOTCH3hi (3+) cells were isolated from from K,P or K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  lung tumor cells by staining with CD24-PerCp-eFluor®710 (eBioscience, San Diego, CA), Notch3-Alexa-Fluor®647 (Biolegend, San Diego, CA), and ITGB4-PE (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) in 10% Fetal Bovine Serum in 1x phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 4°C for 30 min in the dark with gentle agitation. SYTOX Green (ThermoFisher Scientific, Grand Island, NY) was used to discriminate live and dead cells. Labeled cells were subjected to fluorescent activated cell sorting on a FACSAria ( BD San Jose, CA) as described .
Ex vivo culture
CD24 + /ITGB4 + /NOTCH3 hi  cells were resuspended in BEGM without hydrocortisone (Lonza, Walkersville, MD) containing 10 ng/mL of keratinocyte growth factor (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA), 5% charcoal stripped fetal bovine serum and 50% Matrigel (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA), and plated on Matrigel-coated tissue culture wells topped with BEGM. Medium was changed twice weekly. Self-renewal was assessed in oncospheres released from Matrigel using Cell Recovery Solution (BD Biosciences). Cells were disassociated into single cells by triturating with StemPro® Accutase (Invitrogen, life technology) and assessed for oncosphere size and number 2 weeks after being plated in 96-well Matrigel-coated plates. In some experiments, total lung epithelial cells isolated from NTg, Ect2 fl/fl , K,P and K,P,Ect2 fl/fl  mice were plated as described above and infected with Ad-Cre (MOI 50). Cells were released from Matrigel culture using BD Cell Recovery Solution (BD Biosciences) and total RNA and DNA were isolated for analysis.
Lentiviral RNAi, cell transduction, plasmids, transfections, and immunoblot analysis
Lentiviral vectors containing human and mouse Ect2, Rac1, NPM1, UBF1 or a non-target control (NT) shRNA were obtained from Sigma, packaged into recombinant lentivirus, and used to establish stable cell transfectants as described previously . The human HA-tagged RNAi-resistant ECT2 lentivirus was described previously . The Ect2 GEF-deficient and NLS mutants were generated as previously described . The T328A and T328D Ect2 phospho-mutants were described previously . Ect2 cDNAs were packaged into lentiviral vectors as previously described , and cells stably transduced with lentiviral Ect2 alleles were produced as described previously . Nucleotide free Flag-Rac1G15A and Myc-caRac1V12 (caRac1) plasmids were gifts of Dr. P.Z. Anastasiadis (Mayo Clinic). Efficiency of Ect2, Rac1, UBF1 and NPM1 knockdown and expression of Ect2 and Rac1 cDNAs was assessed by QPCR and immunoblot analysis as previously described .
Subcellular fractionation and immunoprecipitation
Cells were fractionated using NE-PER (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA) as previously described . Nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions were assessed for purity by Lamin A/C and MEK1 immunoblot analysis.
Multinucleated cell analysis
Cells grown on glass chamber slides (Nalge Nunc International, Naperville, IL, USA) were fixed, permeabilized and stained with phalloidin Alexa Fluor 594 and 4′,6 diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Vectashield; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) as previously described . Representative fields were photographed at 20x magnification, and >1000 cells from each cell type were analyzed for multiple nuclei.
Mass spectrometry and pathway analysis
Cells expressing empty FLAG-vector or FLAG-WT-Ect2 were fractionated and nuclear fractions subjected to FLAG immunoprecipitation as described above. Mass spectrometry was performed as previously described ( ;  ). KEGG pathway analysis was performed on Ect2-associated proteins represented in our proteomics analysis by >2 unique peptides using the David Bioinformatics Resource.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
ChIP was performed to assess occupancy of NPM1, or co-occupancy of UBF with Ect2 or Rac1, on rDNA as follows: Cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde, lysed and cytoplasmic protein fractions discarded. Nuclear fractions were sonicated to obtain DNA fragments of ~500 bp as determined by agarose gel electrophoresis and ethidium bromide staining. Pre-cleared supernatants were first incubated with a NPM1, UBF or IgG control antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) overnight followed by 3 hr (4°C) incubation with Protein A/G-conjugated agarose beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Protein A/G bead complexes were washed and protein-DNA complexes were eluted in 1% SDS and 100 mM NaHCO 3 . For co-occupancy experiments, eluants were subjected to a second ChIP with Ect2 or Rac1 antibody. Crosslinks were reversed by incubation overnight in elution buffer containing 200 mM sodium chloride. DNA was extracted, purified, precipitated and resuspended in Tris-EDTA for QPCR using primer sets spanning the human rDNA repeat (primers listed in  ). QPCR was performed using SYBR® Green (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) dye detection on an Applied Biosystems ViiA7 thermal cycler and results quantified by the comparative Ct method.
RNA isolation and 45S rRNA expression
Total RNA was isolated from cells using the RNAeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) and from primary LADC tumors using RNAqueous (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). 45S pre-rRNA abundance was assessed by QPCR using SYBR-green as described above. 45S pre-rRNA levels were normalized to β-actin.
Rac1 and RhoA activity assays
Nuclear Rho GTPase activity was determined in nuclear lysates by affinity pulldown as previously described .
Transformation and tumorigenicity assays
Human LADC cell lines and KP tumor cells were assessed for transformed growth in soft agar as previously described . In some experiments, ANF (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), the RNA polymerase I inhibitor CX-5461 (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA), or diluent was added to the cultures at the concentrations indicated in the figure legend. 1×10 5  CD24+/ITGB4+/NOTCH3 hi  cells were implanted subcutaneously in non-transgenic C57BL/6 syngeneic mice as previously described . Tumor volume and final tumor weight were assessed as previously described .
Analysis of TCGA Lung Adenocarcinoma Data
A TCGA lung adenocarcinoma dataset (517 cases) was interrogated for correlations between expression of Ect2, and of 17 Rho GEFs (listed in  ), and expression of 286 ribosomal processing genes  using the mutual exclusivity/co-occurence tool at cBioPortal for Cancer Genomics. P values were derived using the Fisher Exact T test. The TCGA LADC dataset was also interrogated for an association of Ect2 mRNA with disease-free and overall survival using the survival analysis tool at cBioPortal and the LogRank Test to assess statistical significance.
Statistical Methods
Statistical analysis of animal survival was carried out using the Log-rank and Wilcoxon tests. Final tumor weights of KP 3+ TIC xenograft tumors were compared using one-way ANOVA. All other statistical analyses used a two-tailed Student’s t-test to assess signficiance. P values of <0.05 were considered significant.
HIGHLIGHTS
SIGNIFICANCE
The  ECT2  oncogene is overexpressed in many human cancers and is required for transformed growth. However, it is unclear how Ect2 drives transformation, and whether it is important for tumor formation in vivo. Here we demonstrate that Ect2 is required for  Kras-Trp53-  driven lung adenocarcinoma (LADC) tumor initiation in vivo, and for ex vivo growth and in vivo tumorigenicity of  Kras-Trp53  LADC tumor-initiating cells (TICs). Ect2-dependent LADC oncogenesis requires rDNA transcription activated via a PKCι-Ect2-Rac1-NPM pathway, which is blocked by the PKCι inhibitor auranofin (ANF). These data provide mechanistic insight into Ect2-mediated transformation, establish a functional link between Ect2-dependent ribosome biogenesis and LADC tumorigenesis, and reveal a therapeutic strategy for treating  KRAS- driven LADC.
Supplementary Material
1
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Ben Madden (Mayo Clinic Proteomics Research Center) for mass spectrometric analysis; Capella Weems, Marie Chrest, Kayla Lewis, Hannah Orsech, Chynna Hendricks and Kathryn Brennan for technical assistance; Brandy Edenfield for immunohistochemistry; Dr. Laura Lewis-Tuffin for flow cytometry; Dr. Andras Khoor for pathology; and Dr. E. Aubrey Thompson and the Fields lab for critical feedback. This work supported by grants from National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute (R01 CA081436, R01 CA 180997, and R21 CA151250-02 to APF, R01 CA042978 to CJD/ADC; and R21 CA204938 to VJ), a Research Supplement to Promote Diversity in Health-related Research Award from the National Cancer Institute (VJ), and a George Haub Family Career Development Award in Cancer Research Grant (VJ). APF is the Monica Flynn Jacoby Professor of Cancer Research, an endowment fund providing partial support for the investigator’s research program.
Footnotes
Publisher's Disclaimer:  This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Publisher's Disclaimer:  This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Conceptualization, V.J., S.A.A., N.R.M., and A.P.F.; Formal Analysis, V.J.; Investigation, V.J., S.A.A., L.J. and N.Y.; Resources, A.D.C., C.J.D. an A.P.F.; Writing – Original Draft Preparation, V.J. and A.P.F.; Review & Editing, V.J., A.D.C., C.J.D., N.R.M. and A.P.F.; Supervision, A.P.F.; Funding acquisition, V.J. and A.P.F.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, V.J., S.A.A., N.R.M., and A.P.F.; Formal Analysis, V.J.; Investigation, V.J., S.A.A., L.J. and N.Y.; Resources, A.D.C., C.J.D. an A.P.F.; Writing – Original Draft Preparation, V.J. and A.P.F.; Review & Editing, V.J., A.D.C., C.J.D., N.R.M. and A.P.F.; Supervision, A.P.F.; Funding acquisition, V.J. and A.P.F.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
eTOC Justilien et al. reveal that the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Ect2 is required for tumor initiation in a non-small cell lung carcinoma model and uncover a nuclear role for Ect2 in promoting rDNA transcription, which is important for transformation, through a mechanism involving Rac1, NPM, and UBF1.
eTOC
Justilien et al. reveal that the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Ect2 is required for tumor initiation in a non-small cell lung carcinoma model and uncover a nuclear role for Ect2 in promoting rDNA transcription, which is important for transformation, through a mechanism involving Rac1, NPM, and UBF1.
REFERENCES
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES