Protein Kinase Cι and Wnt/β-catenin signaling: Alternative pathways to  Kras / Trp53  driven lung adenocarcinoma
Ning Yin
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Yi Liu
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Andras Khoor
2 Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Xue Wang
3 Department of Health Sciences Research Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
E. Aubrey Thompson
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Michael Leitges
4 Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, Newfoundland, Canada, A1C 5S7
Verline Justilien
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Capella Weems
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Nicole R. Murray
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Alan P. Fields
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, Florida 32224
Author Contributions
Associated Data
RNA-Seq data has been deposited in GEO under the accession  .
Summary
We report that mouse LSL -Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl  (KP)-mediated lung adenocarcinoma (LADC) tumorigenesis can proceed through both PKCι-dependent and PKCι-independent pathways. The predominant pathway involves PKCι-dependent transformation of bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASCs). However, KP mice harboring conditional knock out  Prkci  alleles (KPI mice) develop LADC tumors through PKCι-independent transformation of Axin2 +  alveolar type 2 (AT2) stem cells. Transformed growth of KPI, but not KP, tumors is blocked by Wnt pathway inhibition  in vitro  and  in vivo . Furthermore, a KPI-derived genomic signature predicts sensitivity of human LADC cells to Wnt inhibition, and identifies a distinct subset of primary LADC tumors exhibiting a KPI-like genotype. Thus, LADC can develop through both PKCι-dependent and PKCι-independent pathways, resulting in tumors exhibiting distinct oncogenic signaling and pharmacologic vulnerabilities.
In Brief
Yin et al. discover that  Kras G12D ; Trp 53 −/−  (KP)-driven mouse lung adenocarcinomas (LADC) are phenotypically different from KP LADC without PKCι (KPI) expression. A KPI-derived genomic signature identifies KPI-like human LADC and predicts susceptibility to Wnt inhibitors.
Graphical Abstract

Introduction
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in the world . Lung adenocarcinoma (LADC) is the most common subtype of lung cancer, accounting for ~40% of diagnoses. The most prevalent oncogenic driver mutations in LADC are activating mutations in  KRAS , which occur in ~30% of LADC tumors, and loss of function mutations in  TP53 , which occur in ~70% of LADC tumors . Despite recent advances in targeted therapies for distinct subtypes of lung cancer, no approved or highly effective targeted therapies exist for  KRAS/TP53 -driven LADC. Thus, there is a strong need to better understand the molecular mechanisms that drive  KRAS / TP53  LADC and translate this knowledge into new and improved therapeutic strategies.
We previously identified  PRKCI  (encoding for PKCι) as an oncogene that is frequently overexpressed and associated with poor outcome in LADC ( ;  ). PKCι drives an aggressive stem-like tumor-initiating cell (TIC) phenotype in both  KRAS -driven LADC , and in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) , the second most frequent form of lung cancer. In  KRAS  LADC, PKCι establishes and maintains a TIC phenotype by activating a PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling axis that drives transformed growth and tumor initiation . Pharmacologic blockade of PKCι signaling potently inhibits  KRAS  LADC cell proliferation  in vitro  and tumorigenicity  in vivo,  demonstrating the critical role of PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling in LADC tumorigenesis.
The  Kras G12D ; Trp53 fl/fl  (KP) LADC mouse model recapitulates many aspects of human  KRAS/TP53  LADC, including tumor heterogeneity inherent in the human disease. Several distinct cells of origin are capable of being transformed in KP mice ( ;  ). Bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASCs) are multi-functional stem cells residing at the bronchioalveolar duct junction (BADJ) that can give rise, through lineage-restricted differentiation, to either bronchial club (Clara) cells or alveolar pneumocytes ( ;  ). In response to oncogenic  Kras  BASCs expand to give rise to LADC cells . More recent studies using adenovirus with cell type-specific promoters driving Cre expression demonstrate that oncogenic  Kras  can also transform AT2 cells to give rise to LADC ( ;  ;  ). These observations have led to the hypothesis that subtypes of human LADC may also arise from distinct cells of origin, and account for the molecular, pathological and perhaps pharmacological heterogeneity exhibited by LADC tumors. However, little is known about the specific oncogenic pathways driving tumorigenesis in these alternative cells of origin, or whether specific molecular subsets of human LADC tumors resemble tumors arising from them.
We previously demonstrated that  Prkci  deficiency disrupts oncogenic  Kras -mediated BASC expansion and subsequent lung adenoma formation  in vivo  , and that PKCι is required for the transformed phenotype of human LADC cells  in vitro  and tumorigenesis  in vivo  . In LADC cells, PKCι establishes and maintains a highly aggressive stem-like phenotype through activation of a PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling axis . Here we investigate the role of  Prkci  in  KP  LADC tumorigenesis.
Results
PKCι-dependent and -independent pathways to KP LADC
PKCι is required for transformed growth of  KRAS  LADC cells ( ;  ), and ablation of  Prkci  in mouse lung inhibits mutant  Kras -mediated BASC expansion and adenoma formation . However, the role of PKCι in KP LADC tumorigenesis has not been investigated. Therefore, we crossed  Prkci fl/fl  mice with KP mice to generate KPI mice. Tumors were initiated in these mice by intratracheal instillation of adenovirus expressing Cre-recombinase (Ad-Cre) as described previously . Both KP and KPI mice developed extensive tumor burden, but KPI mice exhibited a significantly longer survival time (p<0.0035; mean survival = 131 days for KPI; 119 days for KP mice) . KPI mice had a significantly lower tumor burden than KP mice at 12 weeks post-Ad-Cre instillation, though tumor burden at six weeks and at endpoint was not significantly different between genotypes . PCR of genomic DNA from KP and KPI tumors verified recombination of the LSL -Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl  and  Prkci fl  alleles , and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining confirmed that KP tumors expressed elevated PKCι, whereas KPI tumor cells expressed no detectable PKCι . Histopathological analysis at six weeks revealed that KP mice harbor mostly bronchiolar lesions (75%) and fewer alveolar lesions (25%), whereas KPI mice harbor predominantly alveolar lesions (84%) (  and  ). Classifying tumors into three categories of increasing grade, hyperplasia, adenoma and carcinoma , revealed that KP mice exhibited more carcinomas than KPI mice . Analysis at 12 weeks using the tumor grading system described by Jackson et al.  revealed that both KP and KPI mice exhibited mostly adenomas and carcinomas, though KP tumors were of significantly more advanced grade than KPI lesions . Thus, KP tumorigenesis can proceed in the presence or absence of  Prkci , albeit with different distribution of lesions within the lung, and at different rates of progression.
(A)Effect of genetic loss of  Prkci  on survival of KP and KPI mice after Ad-Cre-induced LADC formation. *p<0.0035 between KPI and KP by Student’s t-test. n=17 (KP), n=33 (KPI).
(B) Tumor burden in KP and KPI mice at 6 weeks, 12 weeks and at endpoint after tumor induction. Tumor burden (tumor area/total lung area) is expressed as % Total Lung Area. Results represent the mean ± SD; n≥5; *p<0.05 by Student’s t-test.
(C) PCR of genomic DNA from KP and KPI mice for Cre-mediated recombination of LSL -Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl , and  Prkci fl  alleles. unrec.=unrecombined; rec.=recombined; WT, wild-type.
(D) Representative images of KP and KPI tumor tissue sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E; upper panels) or for PKCι by IHC (lower panels).
(E) Distribution of preneoplastic and malignant lung lesions in KP and KPI mice. *p<0.00001 by Chi-square.
(F) Representative H&E images of lung lesions in KP and KPI mice six weeks after tumor initiation. Arrowheads indicate bronchiolar lesions; dotted circle indicates alveolar lesion in KP mouse.
(G) Classification of lesions in KP and KPI mice six weeks after tumor initiation. Lesions were counted and classified pathologically as hyperplasia, adenoma or carcinoma. Data represent number of lesions of each grade. n=5 mice/genotype. *p<0.00001 by Chi-square.
(H) Tumor grade analysis of lung lesions in KP and KPI mice 12 weeks after tumor initiation. Data represent number of lesions of each grade. n=5 mice/genotype. p<0.00001 by Chi-square.
Isolation and characterization of KP and KPI LADC cells
We next established KP and KPI LADC cell lines from three independent KP (KP1–3) and KPI (KPI1–3) tumors. PCR of genomic DNA confirmed complete recombination of the LSL -Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl  and  Prkci fl  alleles in each cell line . Immunoblot analysis confirmed that KP cells express abundant PKCι, whereas KPI cells express no PKCι . Two lentiviral shRNA-mediated PKCι knock down (KD) constructs significantly decreased PKCι in KP cells , and inhibited growth of KP cells in soft agar  and as oncospheres in non-adherent culture (  and  ) while having no effect on KPI cells. Interestingly, KP cells formed larger oncospheres (  and  ), exhibited more efficient clonal expansion , and a higher plating efficiency in soft agar than KPI cells . These behaviors are consistent with the more aggressive transformed behavior of KP tumors  in vivo . Consistent with their more aggressive behavior, KP cells expressed low NKX2.1 and high HMG2A2 levels compared to KPI cells . NKX2.1 suppresses malignant progression of KP tumors, at least in part, through suppression of HMGA2 expression . Thus, KP and KPI cells display genetics and transformed behaviors consistent with KP and KPI tumors  in vivo .
(A) PCR of genomic DNA from three independent KP and KPI LADC cell lines (1, 2 and 3) Cre-mediated recombination of LSL -Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl , and  Prkci fl  alleles. unrec.=unrecombined; rec.=recombined; WT, wild-type.
(B) Immunoblot of KP and KPI LADC cell lines for PKCι. GAPDH is a loading control.
(C) Immunoblot analysis confirming lentiviral shRNA-mediated PKCι knock down (PKCι KD) in KP and KPI cell lines using two independent lentiviral shRNAs targeting mouse PKCι (1 and 2) or a non-target control (NT) as indicated. GAPDH is a loading control.
(D) Relative soft agar colony formation in NT control or PKCι KD KP and KPI LADC cells, results expressed as mean % NT control ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 compared with NT by Student’s t-test.
(E and F) Representative micrographs (E) and oncosphere size (F) in NT control and PKCι KD KP and KPI cells. (E) Scale bars represent 100 μm. (F) Results expressed as oncosphere diameter (μm) mean ±SEM. *p<0.05 compared with NT by Student’s t-test.
(G) Relative clonal expansion of NT control or PKCι KD KP and KPI cells. Results are expressed as mean % of single cells generating oncospheres ±SEM. Number of cells counted: 65 (KP/NT); 65 (KP/KD1); 70 (KP/KD2); 49 (KPI/NT); 50 (KPI/KD1); and 56 (KPI/KD2). *p<0.0002 (KP/NT vs. KP/KD1); **p=0.0001 (KP/NT vs. KP/KD2) by Chi square.
(H) Anchorage-independent growth of KP and KPI cells. Results represent mean soft agar colonies ±SEM. n=5. *p<0.05 compared to KP by Student’s t-test.
(I) Expression of NXK2.1 and HMGA2 in KP and KPI cells. Results expressed as relative mRNA abundance and represent means in three independent KP or KPI cell lines ±SEM. * p<0.05 compared to KP by Student’s t-test. n=3.
(J) Immunoblot of KPI cells transfected with adenovirus containing PKCι or with control empty adenovirus (Vector). Three untransfected KP cell lines served as a positive control for PKCι expression. GAPDH is a loading control.
(K and L) Soft agar colony number (K) and size (L) of KPI cells transfected with vector or PKCι adenovirus. Results expressed as mean ±SEM. n=3. No significant differences were observed by Student’s t-test.
We next assessed whether the less aggressive behavior of KPI cells was reversed by restoring PKCι to levels comparable to KP cells . Interestingly, re-expression of PKCι had no significant effect on either the number  or size  of soft agar colonies. Thus, transformed growth of KPI cells is PKCι-independent, and PKCι re-expression does not affect the transformed phenotype of KPI cells.
PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling is decreased in KPI tumor cells
We recently described a PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling axis that drives the growth of human  KRAS -transformed LADC cells . In this pathway, PKCι phosphorylates the oncogenic transcription factor ELF3, which stimulates ELF3-mediated NOTCH3 transcription. NOTCH3 in turn activates cell-autonomous Notch signaling to stimulate transformed growth. IHC staining revealed that KP tumors express higher levels of NOTCH3, ELF3 and PKCι-phosphorylated ELF3 (pS68-ELF3) than KPI tumors . Immunoblot analysis of KP and KPI cells verified these results . We conclude that PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling is active in KP tumor cells, but is dramatically reduced in KPI tumor cells both  in vivo  and  in vitro .
(A) IHC of KP and KPI tumors for NOTCH3, ELF3, p-ELF3 and PKCι. Representative images are shown.
(B) Immunoblot of KP and KPI cells for NOTCH3, ELF3, p-ELF3 and PKCι. GAPDH is a loading control.
(C) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis of RNA-seq of KP and KPI cells. Results plotted as −log p value for pathway enrichment in KPI versus KP cells. Dotted line indicates −log p value 1.3 (p value 0.05). β-cat. = β-catenin.
(D) Expression of Wnt/β-catenin pathway genes in KP and KPI cells. qPCR for  Cdh5 ,  Axin2 ,  Mmp7 ,  Tcf7  and  Apc2  mRNA.  Prkci  included as a control. Results expressed as mRNA abundance (fold of KP cells) ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.005 by Student’s t-test.
(E) Immunoblot of KP and KPI LADC cells for β-catenin. GAPDH is a loading control.
(F) β-catenin transcriptional activity in KP and KPI cells. Results show the ratio of Top/Fop Flash activity expressed as fold of KP cells ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 by Student’s t-test.
(G) Effect of the β-catenin inhibitor MSAB on Top/Fop Flash activity in KP and KPI cells. Results represent Top/Fop Flash ratio expressed as fold DMSO-treated KP cells ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 compared to DMSO-treated KPI cells by Student’s t-test.
(H) Effect of MSAB on soft agar growth of KP and KPI cells. Results represent mean % DMSO control for KP and KPI cells ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 compared to DMSO control by Student’s t-test.
(I) Quantitative analysis of β-catenin IHC staining intensity in KP and KPI tumors. Results represent relative intensity of β-catenin in KP and KPI tumors ±SEM. n=6. *p<0.05 by Student’s t-test.
(J) Representative images of IHC staining for β-catenin in KP and KPI tumors. Inset shows high magnification view of indicated region.
See also  .
Elevated Wnt signaling drives transformed growth of KPI tumor cells  in vitro
Since KPI tumors do not exhibit oncogenic PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling, we reasoned they employ alternative, PKCι-independent oncogenic signaling pathway(s) to support transformed growth. To identify such pathways, we conducted total RNA sequencing and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) of genes differentially-expressed in KP and KPI tumors. IPA identified many differentially-expressed key Wnt/β-catenin pathway genes  indicating differential activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in KPI tumors . qPCR validated increased expression of the prominent pathway components  Cdh5,  and direct β-catenin transcriptional targets,  Axin2, Mmp7 and Tcf7,  and decreased  Apc2 , indicative of Wnt pathway activation in KPI cells . Furthermore, KPI cells expressed higher β-catenin , and elevated β-catenin transcriptional activity as measured by Top/Fop Flash β-catenin transcriptional reporter assays compared to KP cells .
We next assessed the effect of the potent and selective β-catenin inhibitor MSAB  on KP and KPI cells. MSAB led to a significant inhibition of β-catenin transcriptional activity  and soft agar growth  of KPI cells while having little effect on KP cells, indicating that KPI cells are selectively dependent on Wnt/β-catenin signaling. IHC revealed that KPI tumors express higher β-catenin levels than KP tumors . Furthermore, whereas β-catenin localized almost exclusively at the plasma membrane in KP tumors, a significant pool of β-catenin in KPI tumors localizes to the cytoplasm and nucleus , consistent with activated β-catenin signaling in KPI tumors.
PKCι is necessary for  Kras/Trp53 -mediated expansion and transformed growth of BASCs
Since KPI mice develop LADC tumors with a distinct regional distribution and slower progression than KP mice, we next assessed the effect of PKCι loss on growth of lung epithelial cells. Total lung epithelial cells from KPI mice formed significantly fewer and smaller oncospheres in three dimensional Matrigel culture than cells from KP mice after Ad-Cre-mediated activation of  Kras  and  Trp53  loss  ex vivo  ( – ). Since both BASCs and AT2 cells can be transformed by oncogenic  Kras  and  Trp53  loss ( ;  ;  ;  ), we next assessed whether KPI mice exhibit inherent differences in abundance of these cells. Therefore, we isolated BASCs and AT2 cells from KP and KPI mice by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)  . Post-sort analysis  and dual immunofluorescence  verified high enrichment of CCSP + /SPC +  dual positive BASC cells (93% double positive) and CCSP - /SPC +  single positive AT2 cells (96% single positive). FACS analysis also revealed no difference in abundance of BASCs and AT2 cells (expressed as % of total lung epithelial cells) between KP and KPI mice . Thus, loss of either of these cell types is not likely responsible for the decreased  Kras/Trp53 -driven oncosphere formation in KPI mice.
(A and B) Oncosphere number (A) and size (B) of KP and KPI cells grown in non-adherent culture. Results represent mean ±SEM. n=3; *p<0.05 by Student’s t-test.
(C) Micrographs showing the size and morphology of representative KP and KPI oncospheres. Scale bars represent 200 μm.
(D) Abundance of bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASCs) and alveolar type II (AT2) cells in KP and KPI mouse lungs. Data expressed as mean % total lung epithelial cells ±SEM. n=3.
(E) PCR of genomic DNA from KP and KPI BASC and AT2 cells after transduction with Ad-Cre  ex vivo . unrec.=unrecombined; rec.=recombined; WT, wild-type. DNA from total lung epithelial cells in the absence of Ad-Cre included as a control.
(F and G) Oncosphere growth of purified BASCs and AT2 cells from KP and KPI mice transduced with Ad-Cre. Oncosphere numbers (F) and size (G) are shown as mean ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 compared to KP by Student’s t-test.
(H) Immunofluorescence of a bronchiolar lesion in a KP mouse stained for CCSP (green, upper left panel), SPC (red; upper right panel) or merged image CCSP, SPC and DAPI (blue, lower left panel) six weeks after induction of tumor formation. Lower right panel shows H&E image of same lung region revealing growth of bronchiolar hyperplasia from the affected terminal bronchiole. Scale bars indicate 100 μm.
(I) Immunofluorescence of an alveolar lesion in KPI mouse stained for CCSP (green, upper left panel), SPC (red; upper right panel) or merged image CCSP, SPC and DAPI (blue, lower left panel) six weeks after induction of tumor formation. Lower right panel shows H&E image of same lung region revealing an alveolar lesion without bronchiolar involvement. Scale bars indicate 100 μm.
See also  .
We next assessed the ability of oncogenic  Kras  and  Trp53  loss to transform BASCs and AT2 cells from KP and KPI mice  ex vivo . Ad-Cre transduction led to efficient recombination of the oncogenic  Kras ,  Trp53 , and  Prkci  alleles in both cell populations . Interestingly, both BASCs and AT2 cells from KP mice exhibited robust oncosphere formation in three dimensional Matrigel culture, confirming the ability of both cell populations to undergo  Kras - and  Trp53 -mediated transformation (  and  ). In contrast, BASCs from KPI mice exhibited a decrease in oncosphere number and size compared to BASCs from KP mice (  and  ). AT2 cells from KPI mice exhibited a smaller, but significant decrease in oncosphere formation but no change in oncosphere size compared to AT2 cells from KP mice (  and  ). We next visualized and quantified BASCs within bronchioles of KP and KPI mice  in situ  by dual SPC and CCSP immunofluorescence ( ;  ;  ). Lungs from Ad-Cre-treated KP mice at six weeks exhibited frequent clusters of SPC + /CCSP +  BASCs extending into the terminal bronchiole, consistent with the pattern of BASC expansion observed in response to oncogenic  Kras  ( ;  ) or  Trp53  loss  . Quantitative analysis revealed a significant increase in BASCs in terminal bronchioles of KP mice compared to KPI mice . Interestingly, BASC expansion in KP mice was often observed adjacent to bronchiolar hyperplasias , consistent with the notion that these lesions arise from transformed BASCs. In contrast, tumors in Ad-Cre-treated KPI mice arose predominantly in the alveolar space and stained positive for SPC but negative for CCSP . Thus,  Kras/Trp53 -induced transformation of BASCs  ex vivo , and BASC expansion  in vivo , is highly dependent upon PKCι. In contrast, PKCι loss leads to only a partial inhibition of AT2 cell-derived oncosphere formation  ex vivo .
Identification of PKCι-dependent and PKCι-independent AT2 cell populations
Recent studies identified a subtype of AT2 cells, Axin2 +  AT2 cells, as regional lung epithelial stem/progenitor cells that proliferate during lung development to generate alveolar structures, are mobilized after lung injury to repopulate alveoli, and exhibit active Wnt signaling ( ;  ). However, the role of Axin2 +  AT2 cells in LADC tumorigenesis has not been assessed. Interestingly, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) of RNA-seq data from Axin2 +  AT2 cells and KPI LADC cells demonstrated that these cell types expressed a similar Wnt pathway signature . RNA-seq analysis identified Transmembrane 4 Superfamily Member 1 ( Tm4sf1 ) as a cell surface maker expressed in the vast majority (>90%) of Axin2 +  AT2 cells but absent from Axin2 −  AT2 cells, making it useful for sorting Axin2 +  and Axin2 −  AT2 cell populations . Thus, we isolated TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from total mouse lung AT2 cells by FACS ( ;  ). Consistent with published reports, ~20% of AT2 cells in both KP and KPI mice were TM4SF1 +  . Immunofluorescence confirmed that both TM4SF1 +  and TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells were SPC +  but CCSP −   and qPCR confirmed significantly elevated Axin2 mRNA in TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells compared to TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells . To assess transforming potential, TM4SF1 +  and TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells were treated with Ad-Cre  ex vivo  to induce recombination of  Kras ,  Trp53 , and  Prkci  alleles , followed by plating in oncosphere culture . Both TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from KP mice form oncospheres with similar morphology , frequency  and size . However, TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells from KPI mice exhibit a dramatic decrease in oncosphere frequency and size ( – ). In contrast, TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from KPI mice grow as oncospheres exhibiting morphology, frequency and size indistinguishable from TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from KP mice ( – ). Taken together, these data indicate that LADC tumors in KPI mice arise from TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells, whereas those in KP mice arise predominantly from BASCs.
(A) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis of Axin2 +  AT2 cells (left panel) and KPI cells (right panel).
(B) Abundance of total and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells in KP and KPI mice. Results are expressed as mean % total AT2 ±SEM.
(C) Representative immunofluorescence staining of TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells for CCSP and SPC.
(D) qPCR from TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells for Axin2. Results expressed as fold of TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells ±SEM. n=3. *p<0.05 by Student’s t-test.
(E) PCR of genomic DNA isolated from TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from KP and KPI mice after transduction with Ad-Cre  ex vivo  for recombination of  LSL-Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl , and  Prkci fl  alleles. unrec.=unrecombined; rec.=recombined; WT, wild-type. DNA from total lung epithelial cells in the absence of Ad-Cre included as a control.
(F) Micrographs of representative TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cell oncospheres from KP and KPI mice.
(G and H) Oncosphere formation (G) and growth (H) of TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells from KP and KPI mice. Results represent mean ±SEM. n=3; *p<0.05 compared to KP by Student’s t-test.
KP and KPI tumor cells are differentially responsive to PKCι and Wnt inhibition
We previous demonstrated that pharmacologic inhibition of PKCι inhibits LADC growth  in vitro  and  in vivo  ( ;  ). Thus, we assessed the effect of the selective PKCι inhibitor auranofin (ANF) on soft agar growth of KP and KPI cells  in vitro  (  and  ). KP cells exhibited similar high sensitivity to the growth inhibitory effects of ANF (average IC 50  ~0.15 μM), whereas KPI cells exhibited relative resistance to ANF (IC 50  ~2 μM). Conversely, the Wnt inhibitor MSAB potently and selectively inhibited anchorage-independent growth of KPI cells (IC 50  ~0.32 μM) but KP cells were much less responsive (IC 50  ~1.9 μM). We next assessed whether orthotopic KP and KPI lung tumors implanted into the lungs of syngeneic mice exhibited selective responses to these agents  in vivo .  In vivo  bioluminesence (IVIS) monitoring revealed that KP tumors exhibited a significant therapeutic response to ANF (10 mg/kg daily) but no response to MSAB . Conversely, KPI tumors exhibited a significant response to MSAB but not to ANF . Final tumor weights confirmed the differential response of KP and KPI tumors to the growth inhibitory effects of ANF and MSAB, respectively .
(A and B) Growth of KP and KPI LADC cells in soft agar treated with the PKCι inhibitor ANF (A) and the β-catenin inhibitor MSAB (B). Results represent the mean ± SD; n=3, and are plotted as % DMSO control.
(C and D) Growth of KP and KPI LADC cells as orthotopic lung tumors in syngeneic mice. Tumor growth was monitored by bioluminescence (C) and tumor weight was determined at the time of sacrifice (D). Results represent mean bioluminescence expressed as % DMSO control ±SD (C) or mean weight in grams (g) ±SEM (D), n=5/group. *p < 0.05 compared to DMSO by Student’s t-test.
(E) Plot of a Wnt Eigengene score versus MSAB IC 50  in a panel of mutant  KRAS  human LADC cell lines. n=15.
(F) Plot of Top/Fop Flash activity versus MSAB IC 50  in a panel of mutant  KRAS  human LADC cell lines. n=15.
See also 
A subset of human  KRAS / TP53  LADC cells exhibit a KPI-like genotype and Wnt pathway activation
Our data demonstrate that  Kras/Trp53 -driven LADC can arise from two cells of origin, resulting in LADC tumors with distinct oncogenic signaling and therapeutic vulnerabilities. To explore whether human LADC tumor cells exhibit KP- versus KPI-like genotypes, we used principal component analysis to calculate a Wnt Eigengene score based on 17 Wnt pathway genes that are differentially-expressed in KP and KPI cells, and contribute to the GSEA enrichment score . We then calculated Wnt Eigengene scores for a cohort of established human mutant  KRAS/TP53  LADC cell lines using RNA-seq data available from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE) and assessed whether the Wnt Eigengene score predicts sensitivity to MSAB. Dose response analysis revealed a significant (p=0.01) positive correlation between Wnt pathway score and sensitivity to MSAB growth inhibition (MSAB IC 50 ; Spearman Coefficient = −0.63) . Thus, LADC cell lines with high Wnt Eigengene scores exhibited higher sensitivity to MSAB (lower IC 50s ) than those with a low Wnt Eigengene scores (higher IC 50s ). Biochemical analysis revealed that MSAB sensitivity also correlated positively with β-catenin-dependent transcriptional activity (Spearman Coefficient = −0.65, p<0.009) . Thus, our Wnt Eigengene score identifies  KRAS/TP53  LADC cell lines exhibiting increased β-catenin transcriptional activity and enhanced sensitivity to β-catenin inhibition, consistent with a KPI-like phenotype.
A subset of human LADC tumors exhibit a KPI-like genotype
We next generated Wnt Eigengene scores for samples in the TCGA lung adenocarcinoma dataset (n=507 tumors). Wnt Eigengene scores distributed non-randomly, suggesting that a distinct subset or subset(s) of LADC tumors may exhibit high KPI-like Wnt Eigengene scores . To address this possibility, we assessed whether Wnt Eigengene scores are associated with distinct molecular LADC subtypes (1, 2, 3, 4, 5a and 5b) as identified by Chen et al. using multiplatform genomic analysis . Analysis revealed that LADC subtype 3 and LADC subtype 4 tumors exhibited significantly higher Wnt Eigengene scores than other LADC subtypes (  and  ). Supervised clustering of the 17 genes making up the Wnt Eigengene revealed that expression of cadherin 5 ( CDH5 ) was selectively elevated in LADC subtype 4 tumors . Indeed,  CDH5  expression was significantly higher in LADC subtype 4 tumors than all other LADC subtypes . Interestingly,  CDH5  expression also correlated with response of human  KRAS/TP53  LADC cell lines to MSAB (Spearman Coefficient = −0.59, p value =0.02; data not shown). Interrogation of the TCGA data revealed that  PRKCI  expression was lower in LADC subtype 4 tumors than other subtypes (p value of Ad.4 vs Ad.1 = 0.04; Ad.4 vs Ad.2 = 0.07; Ad.4 vs Ad.3 = 0.09; Ad.4 vs Ad.5a = 0.01; Ad.4 vs Ad.5b = 0.04), consistent with the KPI phenotype. Finally, analysis of the subset of TCGA LADC tumor dataset harboring mutant  KRAS  (n=163 tumors) revealed a similar association of higher Wnt Eigengene score with mutant  KRAS  LADC subtype 4 tumors . Taken together, these data indicate that a distinct molecular LADC subtype, LADC subtype 4, exhibits Wnt pathway activation and decreased  PRKCI  expression, consistent with the properties of KPI tumors.
(A) Distribution of Wnt Eigengene scores across the TCGA LADC tumor dataset (n=507).
(B) A stacked bar plot showing the distribution of Wnt Eigengene scores across six molecular subtypes of LADC tumors.
(C) Plot of Wnt Eigengene scores across LADC molecular subtypes. Middle lines indicate the median values, boxes show 25% and 75% confidence intervals and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Dots indicate outliers. *indicates statistically significant differences in Eigengene score between LADC subtype 4 and other subtypes by two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test. p value Ad4 vs indicated subtype: Ad1 = 3.8 × 10 −10 ; Ad2 = 0.008; Ad3 = 0.28; Ad5a = 0.01; Ad5b = 1.3 × 10 −12 . n=507. (D) Heat map showing expression of 17 Wnt genes comprising the Wnt Eigengene across LADC molecular subtypes.
(E) Plot of CDH5 mRNA expression across LADC molecular subtypes. Middle lines indicate the median values, boxes show 25% and 75% confidence intervals and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Dots indicate outliers. *denotes a statistically significant difference in  CHD5  expression in subtype 4 compared to other subtypes by two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test. p value (Ad.4 vs Ad.1) = 3.5 × 10 −6 ; (Ad.2 vs Ad.4) = 1.5 × 10 −6 ; (Ad.3 vs Ad.4) = 0.0003; (Ad.5a vs Ad.4) = 2.2 × 10 −5 ; (Ad.5b vs Ad.4) = 0.001.
(F) Plot of Wnt Eigengene scores in mutant  KRAS  LADC tumors classified by molecular subtype. A Wnt Eigengene score was calculated for LADC tumor samples in the TCGA LADC dataset harboring mutant  KRAS  (n=163) and plotted by molecular subtype. Middle lines indicate the median values, boxes show 25% and 75% confidence intervals and error bars show 95% confidence intervals. Dots indicate outliers. *indicates statistically significant differences in Eigengene score between LADC subtype 4 and other subtypes by two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test. p value Ad4 vs indicated subtype: Ad1 = 0.003; Ad2 = 0.078; Ad3 = 0.072; Ad5a = 0.100; Ad5b = 7.8 × 10 −5 .
(G) Plot of β-catenin Histoscore versus PKCι Histoscore in human LADC tumors. TMAs of archived LADC cases were subjected to IHC for β-catenin and PKCι. Histoscores were calculated as described in  . Spearman correlation coefficient = −0.36. p<0.0003. n=95.
(H) IHC of representative KP- and KPI-like human LADC tumors. Scale bars represent 100 μm. Inset: Higher magnification of indicated area to reveal β-catenin staining pattern.
We next assessed expression of β-catenin and PKCι by IHC in tissue microarrays from archived LADC tumors using Histoscore algorithms as described in  . Scatter plot analysis revealed a relatively weak but significant inverse association between PKCι and β-catenin Histoscores across 95 evaluable LADC cases . IHC staining of representative KP- and KPI-like LADC tumors revealed elevated cytoplasmic and nuclear localization β-catenin staining and low PKCι in KPI-like tumors, and weaker membrane-restricted β-catenin staining and high PKCι expression in KP-like tumors . These data indicate that a subset of human LADC tumors exhibit KP- and KPI-like phenotypes, and reinforce the importance of PKCι in determining these phenotypes in human LADC tumors. Our data also suggest that low PKCι levels, and elevated β-catenin and  CDH5  levels may be useful as biomarkers of the KPI phenotype in human LADC, and have implications for clinical management of this molecular LADC subtype.
Discussion
PRKCI  is an oncogene in many human tumor types, including the most prevalent forms of lung cancer, LSCC and LADC ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ). PKCι is a critical oncogenic driver in the vast majority of LSCC tumors . 85–90% of LSCC tumors harbor chromosome 3q26 copy number gain, leading to coordinate overexpression of PKCι and a second 3q26 oncogene,  SOX2 . Coordinate overexpression of PKCι and SOX2 drives a highly aggressive stem-like, TIC phenotype that drives LSCC tumorigenesis by activating a PKCι-SOX2-Hedgehog signaling axis .
PKCι is also a key oncogenic factor in human LADC ( ;  ;  ;  ). PKCι is frequently overexpressed in primary LADC tumors and human LADC cell lines, and shRNA-mediated PKCι KD leads to inhibition of transformed growth and tumor initiating activity of LADC cells . In LADC, PKCι activates a PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling axis that maintains a stem-like TIC phenotype . However, PKCι expression is more variable in LADC tumors than in LSCC tumors. Significant subsets of LADC tumors either overexpress PKCι, or show little or no change in PKCι expression compared to normal lung epithelium. However, the significance of this variable PKCι expression pattern in LADC has been of unknown significance until now. Our data indicate that low PKCι expression is associated with a specific molecular subtype of human LADC.
We previously demonstrated that genetic ablation of  Prkci  blocks BASC expansion and subsequent lung adenoma formation in response to oncogenic  Kras  . Our current data extend these findings, demonstrating that  Kras/Trp53  driven BASC transformation and LADC formation is highly dependent upon  Prkci . Interestingly however, despite the strict dependence on  Prkci  for BASC-derived LADC, KPI mice develop LADCs, albeit with a distinct distribution pattern and slower rate of progression. Our molecular and cellular studies demonstrate that LADC tumors in KPI mice are PKCι-independent and arise from a distinct LADC cell-of-origin, Axin2 +  AT2 cells. Importantly, restoration of PKCι expression in KPI tumor cells does not affect their transformed behavior, conclusively demonstrating that PKCι is not tumor suppressive in these cells.
Previous studies indicate that there are multiple cells of origin for  Kras/Trp53  LADC. In addition to BASCs, bronchiolar club cells and AT2 cells are possible cells of origin ( ;  ;  ), though some studies have cast doubt on the role of club cells . Our data are consistent with both BASCs and AT2 cells, providing compelling evidence for a specific role for Axin2 +  AT2 cells, as LADC cells of origin. Axin2 +  AT2 cells are regional lung epithelial stem cells that mobilize during development and after lung injury to regulate alveologenesis ( ;  ;  ). Axin2 +  AT2 cells exhibit dependency upon Wnt signaling for their growth and stem-like activity since Wnt inhibition leads to growth cessation and differentiation of Axin2 +  AT2 cells into AT1 cells ( ;  ). We have found that Axin2 +  AT2 cells, like KPI LADC cells, exhibit a Wnt genomic signature indicating that KPI LADC cells arise from transformed Axin2 +  AT2 cells. Our data demonstrate that Axin2 +  AT2 stem cells serve as cells of origin for  Kras/Trp53 -driven LADC, giving rise to LADC tumors that are functionally, transcriptionally and biochemically distinct from BASC-derived LADC tumors. Specifically, BASC-derived LADC tumors exhibit PKCι dependency, elevated PKCι expression and activated PKCι-ELF3-NOTCH3 signaling, whereas Axin2 +  AT2 cell-derived LADC tumors exhibit PKCι-independent growth and activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Consistent with their different origin and distinct oncogenic signaling mechanisms, BASC- and Axin2 +  AT2-derived LADCs exhibit distinct sensitivity to pharmacologic inhibition of PKCι and Wnt signaling, respectively, both  in vitro  and  in vivo .
Human LADC is a highly heterogeneous disease with diverse pathological, genetic and biochemical characteristics ( ;  ). Using a multi-platform analysis of the TCGA LADC dataset, Chen et al. classified LADC into six distinct molecular subtypes, LADC subtypes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5a and 5b . Interestingly, our results indicate that mouse KPI LADC tumors closely resemble the LADC subtype 4. Specifically, LADC subtype 4 tumors exhibit significantly higher Wnt Eigengene scores that define a KPI-like phenotype indicative of Wnt pathway activation. Our data indicate that this classification is of clinical significance since human  KRAS/TP53  LADC cell lines with high Wnt Eigengene scores exhibit enhanced β-catenin transcriptional activity and are highly responsive to the growth inhibitory effects of the β-catenin inhibitor MSAB. Like KPI LADC cells, these human LADC cells are dependent upon Wnt/β-catenin signaling for transformed growth. In this regard, we have observed a significant subset of primary LADC tumors with elevated expression and nuclear localization of β-catenin in association with low PKCι expression, demonstrating the existence of a KPI-like phenotype in a subset of primary human LADC tumors. Our data suggest that KPI-like, LADC subtype 4 tumors may exhibit selective sensitivity to Wnt/β-catenin directed therapies, a number of which are actively being evaluated in clinical studies for the treatment of cancer. Our results indicate that expression profiling using a combination of nuclear β-catenin, high  CDH5  expression and/or decreased PKCι expression may be useful in identifying patients with KPI-like, LADC subtype 4 tumors that will be more likely to respond to Wnt/β-catenin directed therapeutics.
STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dr. Alan P. Fields .
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Generation of LSL- Kras G12D ; Trp53 fl/fl ;  Prkci fl/fl  Mice and Lung Adenocarcinoma Tumorigenesis 
LSL -Kras G12D  and  Trp53 fl/fl  C57BL/6 mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratories and crossed to generate LSL -Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl  (KP) mice. KP mice were crossed to our previously characterized conditional knock out  Prkci  C57BL/6 mice ( Prkci fl/fl )  to generate LSL -Kras G12D ;Trp53 fl/fl ; Prkci fl/fl  (KPI) mice. KP and KPI mice (6~10 weeks old) were anesthetized with ketamine and xylazine, intubated intratracheally, and instilled with two 50 μL aliquots of Ad-CMV-Cre (1.5 × 10 8  PFU/mL) (Vector Laboratories) as described previously . All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Mayo Clinic. The status of the LSL -Kras G12D ,  Trp53 fl/fl  and  Prkci fl/fl  alleles was determined by PCR as described  using the primers listed in  . Animals were inspected daily for health, and moribund animals were considered to be at endpoint and were euthanized by CO 2  asphyxiation for necropsy. Criteria for euthanasia were based on independent veterinary assessment using AAALAC guidelines; animals in a condition considered incompatible with continued survival were considered deaths. Animals removed at sacrifice or found dead with confirmed lung tumors were considered censored deaths.

Establishment of KP and KPI LADC tumor cell lines 
Tumor tissues were dissected from Ad-Cre-instilled KP or KPI mice and processed for lung epithelial cells isolation as described in Method Details below. KP/KPI cells from 2 female mice and 1 male mouse were used in this study. Single tumor cell suspensions were plated in serum-free DMEM-F12 (1:1) medium (Life Technologies) and maintained in ultra-low attachment flasks (Corning, Corning, NY).

Human Cell Lines 
Human lung adenocarcinoma cell lines (H2030 male, H2009 female, SW1573 female, H2347 female, H1373 male, H1792 male, H650 male, H358 male, H647 male, H23 male, H1573 female, H1734 female, Calu-6 female, H1355 male and H441 male) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, authenticated by STR profiling upon receipt, and maintained in low passage culture as recommended. Cells were grown as oncospheres in serum-free DMEM-F12 (1:1) medium (Life Technologies) and maintained in ultra-low attachment flasks (Corning, Corning, NY). Growth media was modified by adding 50 μg/ml insulin and 0.4% Albumin Bovine Fraction V from (Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, MO), N2 Plus Media Supplement and B-27 Supplement (Life Technologies), 20 μg/ml EGF and 10 μg/ml basic FGF purchased from (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ).

Orthotopic mouse LADC tumor studies 
Firefly luciferase-labelled KP and KPI LADC cells were suspended in 10% Growth Factor Reduced Matrigel Matrix (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) in PBS and injected orthotopically into the left lungs (final volume 50 μl) of 8~10 weeks old wild type C57BL/6 mice (both male and female) using a 31-gauge needle. Tumor-bearing mice were randomly divided into 3 groups receiving PEG as a vehicle control, ANF (10 mg/Kg) or MSAB (10 mg/Kg) by IP injection daily, 6 days per week for 2 weeks. Tumor growth was monitored by bioluminescence imaging using IVIS (PerkinElmer), after intraperitoneal injection of luciferin (150 mg/kg) in live mice. Bioluminescent signals were quantified using Living Image software (PerkinElmer). All animal experiments were performed under an approved Mayo Clinic IACUC protocol.

TMA Analysis of Human LADC Tumors 
Tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks from 124 archival, de-identified lung adenocarcinoma patient tumor samples using between 3–6 independent cores from each patient sample to provide representative coverage of each tumor. Patient samples were obtained after informed consent under a protocol approved by the Mayo Clinic Institutional Review Board (IRB) (protocol# 09–000469).
Method Details
Histology and Immunohistochemistry
Mice were sacrificed, exsanguinated, and lungs processed for histologic and immunohistochemical analysis as previously described . Briefly, the tissue was deparaffinized by placing slides into three changes of xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. The rehydrated tissue samples were rinsed in water and subjected to antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Slides were treated with 3% H 2 O 2  for 5 min to reduce endogenous peroxidase activity and washed with PBS containing 0.5% (w/v) Tween 20 and incubated with the indicated antibodies: anti-PKCι, anti-ELF3, anti-p-ELF3(S68), anti-NOTCH3, anti-β-catenin (see  ). Slide images were captured and analyzed using a ScanScope scanner and Aperio ImageScope software (Leica Biosystems). Tumor burden was calculated by determining total tumor area and dividing by total lung area using the ImageScope software on hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) stained sections. Results were expressed as % Total Lung Area. KP and KPI lesions were analyzed at six weeks after tumor initiation using the classification system described by Sutherland et al. . Briefly, H&E stained sections were analyzed to determine lesion number, location (bronchiolar or alveolar), and classified as either hyperplasia, adenoma or carcinoma using the criteria in Sutherland et al. Differences in distribution and lesion grade were assessed by Chi-square analysis. KP and KPI tumors were also assessed at 12 weeks using the classification system described by Jackson et al. . Lesions were scored as grade 1–5 based on the following criteria: Grade 1 lesions form solid tumor masses with regular nuclei; grade 2 lesions have slightly irregular nuclei and prominent nucleoli; grade 3 lesions exhibit pleomorphic nuclei and nuclear molding; grade 4 lesions have enlarged, pleomorphic nuclei, aberrant mitoses and multi-nucleated giant cells within the tumor mass; grade 5 lesions had the characteristics of grade 4 tumors plus the presence of desmoplastic stromal elements. Differences in tumor grade between KP and KPI mice were assessed by Chi-square analysis.
Analysis of Human Lung Adenocarcinoma TMAs
Nine TMAs containing 124 diagnosed cases of LADC were sectioned and stained with antibodies to β-catenin and PKCι (as listed in the  ). Each block was sectioned at 4.5 μm onto charged glass slides. The slides were baked, deparaffinized for 15 min in xylene, and rehydrated through graded alcohols to distilled water. Antigen retrieval was performed for 25 min in pH 9.0 retrieval solution (Dako) at 100 °C. The slides were allowed to cool in solution for 25 min, washed in tap water followed by wash buffer (Dako). Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 5 min at room temperature. The slides were also treated with Serum free protein block (Dako) for 5 min. Antibodies against β-catenin or PKCι were diluted in antibody diluent (Dako) (1:400 for β-catenin and 1:1600 for PKCι) and incubated for 60 or 35 min respectively. Following two washes with wash buffer (Dako), the slides were incubated with anti-mouse labeled polymer (Dako) for 30 min at room temperature and rinsed twice in wash buffer (Dako). A final incubation with DAB 5’ (Dako) for 5 min at room temperature was performed, followed by a rinse in distilled water. The slides were counterstained in Gills I hematoxylin for 30 s, rinsed in tap water, dehydrated and mounted. Stained TMAs were scanned at 20x magnification using an Aperio AT2 slide scanner (Leica Biosystems) and images visualized using the Aperio Slide Imaging software. PKCι staining was analyzed with the Aperio ScanScope program. Areas of interest (AOI) containing tumor tissue were marked for each case. A positive pixel algorithm was applied to each AOI, resulting in a determination of the percentage of positive staining. ScanScope reports these values, binned into categories similar to the traditional 0, 1+, 2+, and 3+ scoring system provided by a pathologist. This analysis allowed us to apply the Histo-scoring system  which provides a more dynamic representation of the staining pattern, resulting in values ranging from 0 to 300 by applying the following formula: PKCι Histoscore = [1 × (% of tumor 1+) + 2 × (% of tumor 2+) + 3 × (% of tumor 3+)]. β-catenin staining was also visualized in the Aperio ScanScope program. AOI’s were marked on the images and plasma membrane, cytoplasmic and nuclear regions of tumor cells were manually evaluated for percentage of positive staining in 10% increments, and for staining intensity using the standard pathologist scale (0, +1, +2, +3). A Histoscore was then calculated for each case, resulting in values ranging from 0–1800 using the following formula: β-catenin Histoscore = [(1 × intensity × extent of membrane staining) + (2 × intensity × extent of cytoplasmic staining) + (3 × intensity × extent of nuclear staining)]. This β-catenin Histoscore is weighted toward cytoplasmic and nuclear β-catenin staining since such staining is indicative of Wnt pathway activation. 95 of 124 cases were evaluable for both β-catenin and PKCι IHC.
Primary Lung Epithelial Cell Isolation
Mice were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine by intraperitoneal injection. The trachea was isolated, cannulated and the lungs perfused with 10 ml of 0.9% saline. Dispase (3 ml) was injected into the lung through the trachea followed by 0.5 ml agarose (45 °C). Lungs were immediately covered wit h ice for 2 min, removed from the mice, and incubated in 3 ml dispase for 45 min at room temperature. Lungs were subsequently transferred to tissue culture dishes with HEPES-buffered DMEM (100 U/ml DNAse I per 7 ml), and lung tissue was gently teased into small pieces. Cell suspensions were filtered through cell strainers and red blood cells were lysed by Ammonium chloride solution. Cells were further purified through CD45/CD31 negative selection as described previously . Total lung epithelial cells were resuspended and cultured in matrigel-coated plates.
Lentiviral RNAi Constructs and Transfections
Lentiviral vectors containing mouse PKCι or NT shRNA were obtained from Sigma, packaged into recombinant lentivirus, and used to establish stable cell transfectants as described previously . An NT control vector that does not recognize any mouse or human genes was used as a negative control. Sequences of all lentiviral shRNA constructs are listed in  .
Anchorage-independent growth, Clonal expansion and MTT assays
Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by the ability of cells to form colonies suspended in agarose (SeaPlaque GTG Agarose from Lonza, Rockland, ME) as previously described ( ;  ). To assess the effect of the PKCι inhibitor Auranofin (ANF); Santa Cruz, Cat: sc-202476) and the β-catenin inhibitor methyl 3-((4-methylphenyl)sulfonamido)benzoate (MSAB) (XcessBiosciences, Cat:  –2s), the drugs were added to the soft agar cultures in the concentrations specified in the Figure Legends. Plates were incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO 2  and colony growth assessed after 2~3 weeks after staining with Giemsa (EMD Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). Colony size and number were determined using ImagePro Plus version 7 software. For clonal expansion analysis, oncosphere cells were dissociated by trypsinization and cells filtered through a cell strainer. Dissociated cells were plated into 96-well ultra-low attachment tissue culture plates (Corning, Corning, NY) after dilution to achieve delivery of a single cell/100 μl/well of modified cancer stem cell media. Oncospheres were quantified and assessed for size using Image-Pro Plus version 7 software (Media Cybernetics, Bethesda, MD). Standard MTT assays were performed to measure cellular viability according to supplier’s instructions (Promega, Madison, WI) using a Spectra Max M5 (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Differences in soft agar colony growth, clonal expansion and MTT reduction among treatment groups were analyzed for significance by t-test.
Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) Analysis
BASCs and AT2 cells were isolated from total lung epithelial cells as described previously ( ;  ). To isolate TM4SF1 +  and TM4SF1 −  AT2 cells, we first isolated Sca-1 −  total lung epithelial cells using EasySep™ Mouse Sca-1 Biotin Positive Selection Kit (STEMCELL Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. These cells were then labeled with TM4SF1 −  Fluor647 and Epcam1-PE and subjected to FACS sorting to isolate TM4SF1 +  and TM4SF1 −  populations essentially as described previously . SYTOX green (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to discriminate live and dead cells. FMO controls were used to identify and gate cells.
RNA extraction and qPCR analysis
To determine mRNA expression, cells or tissues were processed using RNAqueous phenol-free total RNA isolation protocols (Ambion, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Extracted RNA was subjected to DNase treatment to eliminate DNA contamination according to provider’s instructions using TURBO DNA-freeTM (Ambion, Life Technologies). DNase-treated RNA was quantified and cDNA was synthesized using reagents (DNTPs, RT-Buffer and RT-Enzyme) from High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA™ Kit (AB, Life Technologies) in a thermocycler (Biometra, Goettingen, Germany). Gene expression was assessed using TaqMan Fast Universal PCR Master Mix from Applied Biosystems (ABI, Life Technologies). qPCR amplification analysis was performed using Applied Biosystems ViiA7 thermal cycler (Foster City, CA). qPCR reagents were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA) or custom designed from Invitrogen. Relative mRNA expression values were determined using GAPDH as internal control. Changes in RNA abundance detected by QPCR were analyzed for significance by t-test. See   for qPCR Primers used.
Immunofluorescence microscopy
For immunofluorescence analysis, BASCs and AT2 cells were fixed in cold 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) for 10 min on ice, then mixed with histogel (American MasterTech) and embedded in paraffin. KP/KPI tumor tissues were fixed in 10% formalin overnight and embedded in paraffin. Paraffin-embedded tissues/cells were rehydrated, washed twice with PBS and then incubated in 1X- Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA from Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS for 30 min, and then with primary antibodies diluted in PBS containing 0.5% BSA (PBS/BSA) at RT for 2 hr. After incubation, cells were washed 3 times in PBS/BSA for 5 min on ice. Washed cells were incubated with secondary Alexa Flour 488 donkey anti-rabbit and Alexa Flour 568 donkey anti-goat antibodies (Invitrogen) at RT for 1 hr, followed by four washes of 1X-PBS/BSA on ice. Coverslips were mounted on slides using Prolong Gold anti-fade from Invitrogen containing 4, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured at 100X using an oil immersion lens. Cells were counted at indicated magnification.
Ex vivo  three dimensional Matrigel Culture
BASCs, total AT2 cells, TM4SF1 −  and TM4SF1 +  AT2 cells were resuspended in Bronchial Epithelial Cell Growth Medium (BEGM; Lonza) without hydrocortisone containing 10 ng/mL keratinocyte growth factor, 5% charcoal-stripped fetal bovine serum, and 50% Matrigel (CORNING) and plated on Matrigel-coated tissue culture wells topped with BEGM. The medium was changed twice weekly. Self-renewal was assessed in oncospheres released from the Matrigel using Cell Recovery Solution (CORNING). Cells were disassociated into single cells by triturating with StemPro Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and assessed for oncosphere size/number within 2 weeks. In some experiments, total lung epithelial cells isolated from KP and KPI mice were plated as described above and infected with Ad-CMV-Cre or Ad-CMV-Null (Vector Laboratories; MOI 50). Cells were released from Matrigel culture using Cell Recovery Solution (CORNING) and total RNA and DNA were isolated for analysis. Results were analyzed for significance by t-test.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
RNA-seq and bioinformatics analysis of mouse lung adenocarcinoma transcriptomes
Total RNA was extracted from six independent spheroid cultured KP and KPI LADC cell lines using the RNAeasy Plus mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Quality of RNA samples was determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer and only samples with RINs >9.0 were used for genomic sequencing analysis. Sequencing was carried out at Mayo Clinic Advanced Genomic Technology Center at Rochester, MN. RPKM-normalized gene counts were generated and used to perform Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). After stringent filtering (p value <0.01 and log2 value >2 or <−0.6) 4,889 differentially expressed genes were subjected to pathway analysis. The core analysis was performed using default settings: direct and indirect relationships between molecules supported by experimentally observed data were considered, networks did not exceed 35 molecules, and all sources of data from human, mouse, and rat studies in the Ingenuity Knowledge Base were considered. This generated priority lists for canonical pathways. Score values were calculated from hypergeometric distribution and right-tailed Fisher’s exact test. Canonical pathways were further filtered by p value <0.05 and Z-score>1.5 or <−1.5. The results of pathway analysis were verified using another 3 independent KP (KP1~3) and KPI (KPI1~3) LADC cell lines.
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
The GSEA software is publicly available from the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University . Axin2 +  AT2 cells Wnt gene expression data were downloaded here . Analysis of Axin2 +  AT2 cells and 4889 differentially expressed genes (KPI vs KP) was performed separately. GSEA was performed using the gene permutation option and gene sets smaller than 15 or larger than 500 were excluded.
Eigengene analysis of TCGA LADC and Quantified Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia data
The R cqn package  was applied to normalize raw read counts, which takes into consideration library size of each sample, gene length and GC content of coding region of each gene. The R edgeR package  was used to perform group comparisons between KP and KPI tumors, and to identify differentially expressed (DE) genes. Up-regulated genes in KPI tumors were selected such that the false discovery rate (FDR) was less than 0.05 and log2 (fold change) was greater than 0. Down-regulated gene in KPI tumors were selected such that FDR is less than 0.05 and log2 (fold change) is less than 0. Up-regulated genes that are also in Wnt signaling pathway were used to compute the “eigengene” for KP and KPI tumor RNAseq samples. The Eigengene score represents the first principle component (PC1) of the expression matrix of those genes and positively correlates with mean expression of those genes. An Eigengene score was likewise generated for Wnt gene expression of human LADC cell lines using RNA-seq data obtained from the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE), and for human LADC tumors using RNA-seq data obtained from the Cancer Genome Atlas.
Data and Software Availability
RNA-Seq data has been deposited in GEO under the accession  .
Significance
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death. LADC, the major form of lung cancer, is a heterogeneous disease characterized by high relapse rates and poor prognosis. Here, we characterize two distinct tumorigenic LADC pathways in mice; PKCι-dependent transformation of BASCs and Wnt-dependent transformation of Axin2 +  AT2 cells. A subset of human LADC tumors exhibit a genomic Wnt signature resembling that of Wnt-dependent mouse Axin2 +  AT2 cell-derived LADCs, and LADC cells with this signature are highly sensitive to Wnt pathway inhibition. Our data provide a compelling rationale for the use of Wnt pathway-targeted therapeutics in treatment of a distinct subtype of human LADC which can be identified using Wnt pathway gene profiling.
Highlights
Distinct PKCι- and Wnt-dependent  Kras/Trp53  LADC tumorigenesis pathways exist
Axin2 +  alveolar type II cells serve as the cell of origin for Wnt-dependent LADC
PKCι- and Wnt-dependent  Kras/Trp53  LADC exhibit distinct therapeutic vulnerabilities
A distinct molecular sub-type of human LADC exhibits properties of Wnt-dependent LADC
Supplementary Material
1
Table S1. Wnt pathway genes from Ingenuity Pathway Analysis differentially expressed in KP versus KPI LADC cells, Related to  .
2
Table S2. Wnt Pathway Genes used for Eigengene construction, Related to  .
3
4
Acknowledgments
We thank Ms. Kayla Lewis and Dr. Lee Jamieson for technical assistance, Ms. Brandy Edenfield and the Mayo Clinic Cancer Biology Histology Facility for processing tumor tissues for analysis, The Mayo Clinic Sequencing Facility for RNA-seq runs, and Dr. Laura J. Tuffin-Lewis for assistance with flow cytometric analysis. We also acknowledge members of the Fields laboratory for critical feedback on the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute (R01 CA081436–21 and R01 CA206267–03 to APF; R01 CA140290–05 to NRM). APF is the Monica Flynn Jacoby Professor of Cancer Research, an endowment fund that provides partial support for the investigator’s research program. VJ is a recipient of a Mayo Clinic Center for Biomedical Discovery Career Development Award. NY and YL are recipients of the Edward C. Kendall Fellowship in Biochemistry from the Mayo Clinic Graduate School.
Footnotes
Declaration of Interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher's Disclaimer:  This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Publisher's Disclaimer:  This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
References
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES