Treatment patterns and outcomes in goblet cell carcinoid tumors of the appendix
Adam C. Fields
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Pamela Lu
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
2 Department of Surgery, Center for Surgery and Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Andrea Enzinger
3 Center for Gastrointestinal Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Center, Boston, Massachusetts
Joel Goldberg
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Jennifer Irani
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Ronald Bleday
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
Garrett Nash
4 Department of Surgery, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
Nelya Melnitchouk
1 Division of Colorectal Surgery, Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
2 Department of Surgery, Center for Surgery and Public Health, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Abstract
Background
Goblet cell carcinoid (GCC) tumors of the appendix are a rare malignancy. We aim to examine the overall survival per stage and the relationship between different treatment modalities and outcomes for patients with GCC tumors of the appendix.
Methods
We identified patients with GCC tumors of the appendix from the National Cancer Database. The main outcome was overall patient survival and cox proportional hazard models were used to ascertain predictors of survival.
Results
There were 2552 patients identified. The median age of diagnosis was 57 (interquartile range: 49–65) and 52.3% of patients were female. The 5-year survival for Stage I disease was 91.1% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 82.2%−95.7%), for Stage II disease was 90.5% (95% CI: 85.8%−93.7%), for Stage III disease was 57.0% (95% CI: 45.0%−67.3%), and for Stage IV disease was 18.9% (95% CI: 9.3%−31.0%). In a Cox proportional hazard model, older age (hazard ratio [HR]: 1.1; 95% CI: 1.03–1.12;  P  < .001), lymph node metastasis (HR: 6.9; 95% CI: 2.76–17.01;  P  < .001), and positive surgical margins (HR: 2.9; 95% CI:1.13–7.26;  P  = .003) were associated with worse overall survival for Stages I to III disease while only older age (HR: 1.03; 95% CI: 1.002–1.06;  P  = .04) was associated with worse overall survival for Stage IV disease.
Conclusions
Patients with GCC tumors of the appendix who have the nonmetastatic disease have a high 5-year survival. We have identified several prognostic factors for GCC.
1 |. INTRODUCTION
Primary tumors of the appendix are uncommon and comprise approximately 1% of all gastrointestinal malignancies.  Goblet cell carcinoid (GCC) tumors are a rare epithelial tumor of the appendix, distinct from the more common adenocarcinoma and neuroendocrine tumors. –  GCC represents up to 19% of primary appendiceal tumors and the incidence is approximately 0.12 per million. , ,  Less than 1% of tumors found incidentally after appendectomy are GCC.
The first-line treatment for patients with GCC is surgical resection. The North American Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (NANETS) and European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society (ENETS) recommend right hemicolectomy for all patients with GCC, although previous studies have suggested that appendectomy is sufficient for Stage I disease. –  Systemic chemotherapy with a combination regimen of 5-fluorouracil and/or cytoreductive surgery (CRS) with heated intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) have all been trialed for late-stage disease with no prospective trials. –
GCC exhibits a wide range of behavior, from indolent and slow-growing to rapidly progressive, and is often identified at late stages. Tumor stage and grade have been associated with survival outcomes while tumor size and lymphovascular invasion have not been linked with survival. ,  5-year overall survival ranges from 40% to 75%; there have been reports of 100% survival for localized disease down to 14% for distant metastatic disease. , –
Given the rarity of the disease, most information about clinical outcomes of GCC derives from small retrospective studies, often involving single institutions. , , –  There are only a few studies using cancer registry data to examine larger numbers of patients with GCC. These studies have largely compared outcomes of GCC with other appendiceal tumors, rather than examining prognostic factors or even stage-specific survival. In this context, the aim of this study is to evaluate outcomes for patients with GCCs using the National Cancer Database (NCDB), a national, prospectively collected cancer-specific database. Specifically, we sought to evaluate the use of different treatment modalities (eg, surgery, chemotherapy), outcomes of those treatments, and to determine prognostic factors associated with survival among patients with GCCs.
2 |. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 |. Data collection
Patients were queried from the NCDB between 2004 and 2015. The database is sponsored by both the American College of Surgeons and the American Cancer Society. Data is recorded from the participating Commission on Cancer sites. The data compilation methods, audits, and specific variable capture are discussed in previous reports.  Participating hospitals send relevant, deidentified patient data to the national office where it is continually audited. This study was examined and approved by the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Institutional Review Board.
2.2 |. Study population
Patients with GCC tumors of the appendix were selected from the NCDB. The International Classification of Diseases for Oncology codes for GCC appendiceal tumors (8243), also known as mucocarcinoid tumor or mucinous carcinoid, was used. All patients over the age of 18 with GCC were included if they had survival data reported. Patients were excluded if they had appendiceal tumors other than GCC.
2.3 |. Study variables
Patient demographics, clinical characteristics, and tumor features were examined. Demographics included patient age, sex, and race. Clinical characteristics included Charlson score and receipt of surgery and/or chemotherapy. Tumor features included histology grade, American Joint Commission Committee staging, tumor size, and lymphovascular invasion. Low-grade tumors consisted of well-differentiated tumors or moderately differentiated tumors while high-grade tumors consisted of poorly differentiated tumors and undifferentiated tumors. The main outcome was overall patient survival. The secondary outcomes evaluated are predictors of survival such as chemotherapy as well as prognostic indicators after surgery, which include positive lymph nodes and positive surgical margins. Surgical resection was stratified into appendectomy/segmental resection (Oncology Codes 30–32) and right hemicolectomy (Oncology Codes 40–41) as previously described.  Only patients who underwent right hemicolectomy were utilized for overall stage-specific survival.
2.4 |. Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics are presented as totals with proportions or medians with interquartile ranges. We used a Cox proportional hazard model to delineate predictors of overall patient survival. Variables selected for inclusion in the multivariable model were age, Charlson score, tumor size, positive surgical margins, chemotherapy administration, and the presence of metastatic disease. These factors were chosen a priori based on clinical information. Overall patient survival was calculated with Kaplan-Meier curves. Statistical tests were carried out with the Statistical Package for Social Science (IBM).
3 |. RESULTS
3.1 |. Patient characteristics
There were 2552 patients with GCC in the NCDB . Patient demographics are displayed in   and tumor features are displayed in  . The median age of diagnosis was 57 (interquartile range: 49–65), 52.3% of patients were female, and the majority of patients were white. The majority of patients had Charlson scores of 0 or 1 (96.1%). Hundred and fifty-two patients (6.0%) had Stage III while 181 patients (7.1%) had Stage IV disease. With regard to tumor characteristics, 291 patients (11.4%) had a lymphovascular invasion and the median tumor size was 2.0cm (interquartile range: 1.0–4.0cm).
Patient selection
TABLE 1
Patient characteristics
TABLE 2
Tumor characteristics
3.2 |. Overall survival
The 5-year overall survival for patients with GCC in this cohort was 77.8% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 75.8%−79.5%). The 10-year overall survival was 58.7% (95% CI: 55.1%−62.2%). The 5-year survival for Stage I disease was 91.1% (95% CI: 82.2%−95.7%), for Stage II disease was 90.5% (95% CI: 85.8%−93.7%), for Stage III disease was 57.0% (95% CI: 45.0%−67.3%), and for Stage IV disease was 18.9% (95% CI: 9.3%−31.0%) .
Survival stratified by stage of disease
3.3 |. Predictors of survival for Stages I to III disease
In a Cox proportional hazard model of Stages I to III disease, older age (hazard ratio [HR]: 1.1; 95% CI: 1.03–1.12;  P  < .001), lymph node metastasis (HR: 6.9; 95% CI: 2.76–17.01;  P  <.001), and positive surgical margins (HR: 2.9; 95% CI: 1.13–7.26;  P  = .003) were all correlated with worse overall patient survival . Chemotherapy administration (HR: 0.6; 95% CI: 0.18–1.96;  P  = .37), histology grade (HR: 1.1; 95% CI: 0.65–2.04;  P  = .17), Charlson score (HR: 0.5; 95% CI: 0.06–3.92;  P  = 0.48), and tumor size (HR: 1.0; 95% CI: 0.98–1.01;  P  = .57) were not significantly associated with survival.
TABLE 3
Cox proportional hazards regression model to predict death in Stages I to III patients
3.4 |. Predictors of survival for Stage IV disease
In a model of Stage IV disease, older age (HR: 1.03; 95% CI: 1.002–1.06;  P  = .04) was correlated with worse overall patient survival . Chemotherapy administration (HR: 0.9; 95% CI: 0.49–1.82;  P  = .86), tumor size (HR: 1.0; 95% CI: 0.99–1.01;  P  = .65), histology grade (HR: 1.1; 95% CI: 0.73–1.57;  P  = .72), and Charlson score (HR: 1.0; 95% CI: 0.99–1.01;  P  = .98) were not significantly associated with survival.
TABLE 4
Cox proportional hazards regression model to predict death in Stage IV patients
3.5 |. Surgery
A total of 2518 patients (98.7%) underwent surgery, 693 patients (27.2%) underwent appendectomy, and 1288 patients (50.5%) underwent right hemicolectomy. For patients undergoing right hemicolectomy, 10.5%, 37.0%, 9.1%, 7.4% had Stages I, II, III, and IV disease, respectively. For patients undergoing appendectomy, the median lymph number of nodes retrieved was 0 (interquartile range: 0–13). For patients undergoing right hemicolectomy, the median number of lymph nodes retrieved was 15 (interquartile range: 11–21). The 5-year survival of patients with negative surgical margins was 83.6% (95% CI: 81.6%−85.3%) compared to 47.2% (95% CI: 40.3%−54.0%) for patients with positive surgical margins,  P  < .001.
3.6 |. Systemic chemotherapy
A total of 63 patients (41.4%) with Stage III disease underwent chemotherapy. For Stage III disease, chemotherapy was associated with significantly improved survival; 5-year survival without chemotherapy was 46% (95% CI: 32.8%−58.1%) and 5-year survival after chemotherapy was 71.4% (95% CI: 55.8%−82.5%),  P  = .007. Hundred and twenty-seven patients (70.2%) with Stage IV disease underwent chemotherapy. For Stage IV disease, 5-year survival without chemotherapy was 16.7% (95% CI: 7.0%−30.6%) and 5-year survival after chemotherapy was 19.4% (95% CI: 11.2%−30.0%),  P  = .10.
4 |. DISCUSSION
GCC is a rare appendiceal tumor with varied behavior. ,  This study is the largest to date to assess survival outcomes in patients with GCC and to describe current treatment strategies. We identify specific prognostic factors associated with GCC and that systemic chemotherapy administration is significantly associated with improved overall survival for the regional disease. Further, we show that the overwhelming majority of patients undergo surgical resection and that positive surgical margins are associated with decreased overall survival.
A total of 98.7% of patients underwent surgery for their GCC of the appendix. NANETS and ENETS recommend surgical resection with right hemicolectomy for all stages of the disease. ,  However, previously published work with small patient populations have suggested appendectomy for Stage I disease and right hemicolectomy for all other stages of disease. –  In our cohort, only 50.5% of patients underwent right hemicolectomy. This finding is similar to a previous national cancer registry study, which showed that only 42% of patients underwent right hemicolectomy.  It is important to note, however, that positive margins and positive lymph nodes were associated with decreased overall survival; therefore, the more extensive resection of right hemicolectomy recommended in the NANETS/ENETS guidelines should be followed.
Systemic chemotherapy, which is an effective adjuvant for gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas, has been extrapolated to patients with GCC of the appendix, although there have been no prospective clinical trials evaluating its effect. ,  ENETS recommends chemotherapy for patients with advanced GCC.  In our cohort, only 41.4% of patients with Stage III disease and 70.2% of patients with Stage IV disease underwent chemotherapy. This is similar to a recent study, which showed that 62.5% of Stage IV patients received adjuvant chemotherapy.  In this study, there was significantly improved survival for patients with Stage III disease undergoing chemotherapy. This is consistent with prior reports showing improved survival with chemotherapy. ,  Taken together, results support the use of chemotherapy as an adjunct to surgical resection in patients who can tolerate adjuvant therapy. Although there are no randomized trials assessing HIPEC and CRS for GCC, prior studies have shown promising results for these management strategies in patients with metastatic GCC. , , –  Larger trials are needed to further assess the efficacy of these treatments.
In terms of survival, the 5-year overall survival in this cohort was 77.8%. This is in line with prior reports, which have reported 5-year overall survival between 40% and 75%. –  The 5-year survival for patients with metastatic disease was 18.6%, which is also similar to prior investigations. ,  In terms of independent predictors of survival, older age, the presence of metastatic disease, and positive surgical margins were associated with decreased overall survival. Prior studies have linked lymph node metastasis and distant metastatic disease to overall survival. ,  Interestingly, tumor size was not predictive of overall survival, which is consistent with prior reports evaluating GCC, but in contrast to studies of other carcinoid tumors, thus adding further evidence that GCCs are a distinct pathologic disease from other hindgut neuroendocrine tumors. ,
There are some limitations to the study that must be addressed. First, we do not have further GCC oncologic data such as specific chemotherapy regimens or tumor recurrence information. Second, this is a retrospective database study and we are only able to assess overall survival as opposed to disease-specific survival. Third, we do not have histology subtype of GCC available,  which has been shown to impact survival or tumor-specific variables such as mitotic index. At the same time, there are many advantages to this study. First, the study population consisted of 2552 patients, which is one of the largest reports with regard to GCC survival outcomes. Second, we used multicenter, national data, which is continuously audited, which provided us with generalizable and reliable patient information.
In conclusion, GCC of the appendix is a rare tumor, representing less than 20% of appendiceal neoplasms, and has thus been difficult to study. It is important for surgical and medical oncologists to better understand prognostic factors and treatment outcomes related to GCC. Our study demonstrates some important features of GCC outcomes (a) distant metastatic disease, lymph node metastasis, and positive surgical margins are associated with decreased overall survival; and (b) systemic chemotherapy is associated with improved survival for the regional disease. In the absence of randomized controlled trials, these findings should be considered when formulating treatment guidelines. Future research should focus on the surgical management of goblet cell carcinoid tumors with a specific focus on if subsets of goblet cell carcinoid patients (ie, Stage I disease or low-grade tumors) can safely undergo appendectomy rather than right hemicolectomy.
Acknowledgments
Funding information
MSK core grant, Grant/Award Number: P30CA008748
Footnotes
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS The authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.
CONFLICT OF INTERESTS
The authors declare that there are no conflict of interests.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The data that support the findings of this study are available from the NCDB. Restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for this study. Data are available from the authors with the permission of The NCDB. The data used in the study are derived from a deidentified NCDB file. The American College of Surgeons and the Commission on Cancer have not verified and are not responsible for the analytic or statistical methodology employed, or the conclusions drawn from these data by the investigator.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the NCDB. Restrictions apply to the availability of these data, which were used under license for this study. Data are available from the authors with the permission of The NCDB. The data used in the study are derived from a deidentified NCDB file. The American College of Surgeons and the Commission on Cancer have not verified and are not responsible for the analytic or statistical methodology employed, or the conclusions drawn from these data by the investigator.
REFERENCES
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES