The Safety of Hepatectomy after Transarterial Radioembolization (TARE): Single Institution Experience and Review of the Literature
Christopher Noda
1 Department of Surgery, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Gregory A Williams
1 Department of Surgery, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Gretchen Foltz
2 Department of Radiology, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Hyun Kim
3 Department of Radiation Oncology, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Dominic E Sanford
1 Department of Surgery, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Chet W Hammill
1 Department of Surgery, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Ryan C Fields
1 Department of Surgery, Barnes-Jewish Hospital and the Alvin J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
Abstract
Background and Objectives
The liver is a frequent site of malignancy, both primary and metastatic. The treatment goal of patients with liver cancer may include transarterial radioembolization (TARE). There are limited reports on the safety of hepatectomy following TARE. Our study’s purpose is to review patients who have received TARE followed by hepatectomy.
Methods
A retrospective study was performed on patients diagnosed with any liver cancer from 2013–2019 who underwent TARE followed by hepatectomy. Postoperative complications were prospectively collected. Descriptive statistics and Kaplan-Meier test were used to assess survival outcomes.
Results
Twelve patients were treated with a TARE followed by a hepatectomy (nine with ≥4 segments resected). Diagnoses included: 6 HCC, 4 cholangiocarcinoma, one metastatic neuroendocrine tumor, and one metastatic CRC. There were no 90-day post-hepatectomy mortalities and the overall morbidity was 66% (16% severe ≥MAGS 3). Hepatectomy-specific complications after hepatectomy included 2 (16%) bile leaks and no post-hepatectomy liver failures. The median recurrence free survival was 26 months. Overall survival at 1-year was 78% and at 3 years was 47%.
Conclusions
Our results support the safety of hepatectomy in select patients after TARE. Additional comparison to patients who receive hepatectomy as a first-line treatment for liver cancers should be investigated.
INTRODUCTION
The incidence of primary liver cancer continues to rise globally with 841,100 new diagnoses and 746,100 cancer related deaths estimated per year. Secondary liver cancers are considered to be even more numerous than primary cancers with the most common primary locations being colorectal and neuroendocrine tumors.[ , ] While those individuals with advanced stage disease may not be initially eligible to receive curative-intent treatment, some patients may become candidates following liver directed therapies, including the transarterial radioembolization (TARE). These minimally invasive procedures have gained traction due to the increasing interdisciplinary role in the treatment of advanced liver disease. There are multiple types of embolization therapy including the transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) and Y-90 TARE. Both of these modalities are effective treatments for cancer patients not initially eligible for surgery. TARE specifically is a valuable tool because it has been shown to induce hypertrophy of the contralateral liver lobe, known as radiation lobectomy. Moreover, recent observational studies have shown that as many as 10% of TARE patients may become surgical candidates after treatment due to the radiation lobectomy effect.[ , ] This is promising especially to advanced cancer patients as TARE is able to decrease tumor burden to surgical criteria in specific cases.
It is necessary to investigate the safety of hepatectomy following TARE since there is a risk for development of hepatotoxicity (jaundice, ascites, sinusoidal obstruction) in as many as 20% of post-TARE patients, and these symptoms can lead to post-operative liver failure and death without careful management.[ , ] To date, there is a dearth of studies reporting the outcomes of patients who receive a hepatectomy following TARE.[ – ] The few published studies have reported a wide range of major complication frequency (16%−78%) [ , ] questioning the true safety of this treatment paradigm. Furthermore, there are other discrepancies in the literature regarding the frequency of certain common morbid events, including bile leak (0–45%).[ , ] Finally, overall survival has a substantial variability in these studies of 16–52 months.[ , ]. The goal of this study is to report on the safety of operating on patients with advanced liver disease post-radioembolization at our institution as well as summarize the current state of the literature on this paradigm.
METHODS
Study population
A retrospective chart review was performed for all patients treated with a hepatectomy following TARE from January 1 st , 2014 to May 31 st , 2019. Approval for the study was obtained from the Washington University Institutional Review Board. Patients older than 18 years old who were diagnosed with a primary or secondary liver cancer and underwent TARE before hepatectomy were included. Patients were recommended for surgery following TARE at a multidisciplinary conference. The diagnosis of cancer was based on available imaging exams and confirmed by reviewing the operative and pathology reports in patients who had surgery. Data from clinical records were reviewed and subsequently extracted for analysis including the following: demographics, past medical and surgical history, clinical presentation, diagnostic studies, therapeutic interventions, and outcomes data including pathological response to TARE treatment through the extent of viable tumor remaining at explant.
A major hepatectomy was defined as any resection that included ≥4 segments removed whereas a minor resection was classified as three or fewer. All complications have been identified and graded prospectively using the Modified Accordion Grading System (MAGS), a validated severity grading system for postoperative complications ranging from “1” as a minor invasive procedure and “6” as death. Bile leaks were graded using the International Study Group of Liver Surgery (ISGLS) definitions, which are adapted by the ACS NSQIP targeted module.
Review of the Literature
A review of the literature was performed. Two databases were queried including Embase and Pubmed in August of 2019. There were multiple methodical procedures followed in order to confirm an extensive review of the literature on hepatic resection following a TARE. Studies considered were those written in the English language and published in a peer-reviewed journal from 2009 to 2019. A comprehensive search was conducted for journal articles, excluding conference papers and case reports, utilizing an appropriate set of key words including the following: “liver cancer”, “liver neoplasms”, “liver metastasis”, “radioembolization”, “transarterial radioembolization”, “liver resection”, “hepatectomy”, “hepatic resection”, “brachytherapy”, “post-operative complication”, “survival”, “morbidity, and mortality”.
Data analysis
Clinical data was reported using descriptive statistics. Overall survival (OS) was defined as the period of time from the date of surgery to the date of death, expressed in years. Alive patients were censored at the last follow-up for analysis. Progression-free survival (PFS) was defined as the period of time from the date of surgery to the date of detection of recurrence (either through imaging or a biopsy) expressed in years. Patients without recurrence were censored at the last follow-up. Recurrence-free and overall survival probabilities were calculated using Kaplan-Meier plots. All statistical tests were 2-sided using α = 0.05 level of significance. SPSS Version 26 was used to perform all statistical analyses.
RESULTS
Between the years of 2013–2019, 561 TAREs were performed at our institution with twelve patients subsequently undergoing a hepatectomy (9 major and 3 minor resections) . The average age at surgery was 62.5 [SD ±13.1] years with a median BMI (lbs/in 2 ) of 25.6 [IQR 23–32] and an average Charlson Comorbidity Index of 4.9 [SD ±1.9]. The majority of our cohort were female (67%) and Caucasian (83%). Half of our cohort was treatment naïve before TARE with 6 patients (50%) experiencing prior treatment to the liver. In those patients that did receive prior treatment, 3 (25%) patients had a prior ablation/tumor debulking procedure and 4 (33%) received chemotherapy (1 patient received both). At the time of surgery, 2 patients had American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) scores of 1 and 3 each while the rest had an ASA score of 2 (66%).
Table 1.
Characteristics of Post-Transarterial Radioembolization Patients with Primary or Secondary Liver Cancer Undergoing Hepatectomy (n = 12)
Radioembolization
All 12 patients were evaluated for TARE because there were characteristics of the tumor pathology that excluded immediate surgical resection. In this patient population, 10 patients had cancer that was either too large or invaded venous structures, with a cohort average tumor diameter of 8.92 [SD±4.71] cm, and 2 patients had multifocal/bilobar tumor nodules. For the first TARE treatment, Theraspheres [BTG] were administered in 8 patients (67%) and SIRSpheres [Sirtex] were used in the remaining patients (33%); treatments were predominantly to the right lobe (67%). The mean TARE activity delivered was 150 gy [range: 58.7–518], and the mean time between first TARE and surgery was 198 [SD ±100] days (two patients completed their second TARE within 40 days after the first).
Hepatectomy
At the time of hepatectomy, 6 (50%) of the resections were for unifocal disease with the largest primary tumor size being 17.5 cm. There were 9 major resections and 3 minor resections . Surgery time ranged from 147 minutes to 509 minutes and the average post-op length of stay was 6.5 [SD ±3.2] days. There was a mean pathological tumor viability of 52.36% [SD±33.2] at explant . There were no 90-day post-hepatectomy mortalities and the overall morbidity was 66% with 16% of those being severe (≥MAGS 3). Hepatectomy specific complications in our cohort included 2 (16%) bile leaks and 0 post-hepatectomy liver failure. In both cases, the patient was treated with a 10Fr by 5cm stent placement through guided endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP) in the common bile duct within a week of surgery. In one case, the stent placement was uncomplicated and removed 2 months following without further hepatic complication. In the second case, the patient experienced continual bile accumulation despite stenting and had a drain placed 6 weeks after hepatectomy. The patient had the drain changed multiple times over the course of the next six months, and two additional drains were added to meet bile output. Four months later, the patient developed septicemia and hepatic abscesses and the patient elected for palliative care succumbing to illness 364 days after hepatectomy.
Table 2:
Literature review of Tumor Pathology, Complications, and survival in TARE patients who receive Hepatectomy
HCC: Hepatocellular Carcinoma, Cholangio: Cholangiocarcinoma, mCRC: Metastatic colorectal cancer, NET: Neuroendocrine tumors
Survival
The median progression free survival following hepatectomy was 26 months  with 4 (33%) patients experiencing a further progression or new metastatic lesions within their liver and 1 patient experiencing the development of pulmonary nodules. There were 4 patients (33%) deceased by the conclusion of the study period and all these patients experienced a recurrence before death. Overall survival after hepatectomy at one-year was 78% and at three years was 47% .
Kaplan-Meier overall survival (a) and progression free survival curves (b) for patients that received a TARE prior to hepatectomy.
Review of the Literature
A review of the literature including searches of the Embase and Pubmed was conducted. Our search returned 226 unique results from the databases with 12 manuscripts meeting our study criteria of hepatectomy following a TARE . In total, there were 227 patients reported on within these studies, and postoperative outcomes have been detailed for 219 of these patients. The most numerous complications post TARE + Hepatectomy reported in the literature include bile leak (22) and post hepatectomy liver failure (15). Other common reported complications include cardiovascular complications/MI (6), sepsis (7), and pneumonia/pulmonary failure (10). Of note, there are some studies that did not report specific complications and instead only reported the grouping of Clavien-Dindo morbidity. Of the studies with greater than 5 patients reporting complications, the range of major morbidity frequency was 16–78%. There were 9 studies reporting median overall survival ranging from 16–52 months. In total, there were 15 deaths recorded within the 90-day postoperative window citing a variety of reasons including multisystem organ failure brought about by biliary leak, intraoperative hemorrhage, and sepsis.
DISCUSSION
There is no consensus recommendation regarding the safety of performing a hepatectomy in a post-TARE patient. Based on our experience and review of the literature, hepatectomy following TARE in selected patients is safe and carries morbidity and mortality risks that are relatively similar to major hepatectomy in non-TARE patients. Henry et al suggests that the high rate of death in this cohort should suggest a degree of trepidation when considering patients for this series of interventions; however, other studies have suggested that there is a low-toxicity profile to surgery despite prior irradiation of non-tumor bearing parenchyma.[ , ] In comparison to the other studies in the literature, ours seems to support the later conclusion. Our patients experienced relatively low rates of major complication frequency (16%) compared to those we found in the literature as well as no 90-day post-operative mortalities.
As previously alluded to in other studies, our successful postoperative outcomes may be attributable to rigorous treatment selection that occurs at our weekly multidisciplinary liver tumor conference.[ , ] This holistic review contributes to the identification of patients who would be more likely to succeed in a post-hepatectomy course despite prior treatment to the liver. We stringently select our post-TARE patients for surgery illustrated by the fact that 561 patients experienced a TARE in our study period, yet only 12 (2%) of patients went on to receive a hepatectomy. Of these patients, only two experienced prior treatment to the functional liver remnant (FLR) specifically before hepatectomy. In addition, our patients had more comorbidities on average than predicted by the advanced liver cancer population (CCI score (4.9) in our study vs. 84% of patients CCI score <3 in Simons et al); nevertheless, we still found favorable outcomes despite half of our patients receiving others treatment than TARE before surgery. In a procedure as radical as hepatectomy, patient selection is crucial to ensure favorable outcomes.
While our study was not aimed to determine prognostic predictors for hepatectomy success in post-TARE patients, an interesting future area of investigation that has already been begun by Shah et al would be to investigate the relationship between the dose of radioactivity delivered and liver specific post-operative outcomes. In their case series, Shah et al found that higher radiation lobectomy doses produced more hypertrophy without leading to a concurrent increase in severity of adverse events. While our patient with the highest dose of activity [518 Gy] experienced only hypervolemia as a complication, the patient with the next highest radioactivity doses [267 Gy] experienced a bile leak. Another patient who received right hepatic artery and caudate lobe TARE in combination to 257 Gy, the third highest total activity amount, also experienced a bile leak. One of these patients had only a PVE before surgery while the other experienced both a TACE and prior abdominal surgery (polypectomy). Of note, neither of our patients who experienced a bilateral TARE developed a liver-specific complication.
The intent of TARE was not specified in many of our cases, so another future area of investigation would be to track the growth of FLR before and after TARE for those patients who receive radiation doses directly intended for contralateral hypertrophy. Melstrom et al is the only study we found that has attempted to determine prognostic factors of major complications post-hepatectomy, but activity of Y-90 was not investigated. As other factors such as clinical comorbidities (Child-Pugh score, tumor morphology and extension, portal vein thrombosis (PVT)) have been shown to be just as important in evaluating post-hepatectomy survival, future study can include analysis of these factors as well.
Our survival data beyond the absence of 90-day post-hepatectomy liver deaths was also reflective of our rigorous patient selection with 78% survival at 1 year and 47% survival at 3 years. Compared to the liver hepatectomy with no TARE population found by Okamura et al [1 year 91.5%; 3 years 61.6%], these survival rates are near the range of liver cancers treated with a first line hepatectomy despite a diagnosis of more advanced disease at baseline. Wright et al has previously suggested that successful selection of patients for surgery can be aided by allowing “at least 6 months from the time of Y90 TARE” before performing hepatectomy. Our results support this notion as our mean time between TARE and surgery was 198 days. This longer wait time is beneficial to determine the patients that respond best to TARE, and are expected to perform well in surgery. Presenting patients regularly at a multidisciplinary tumor board is another method we implement that has been shown to improve patient outcomes.[ , ]
TARE compares well to both local and systemic treatment methods that are used before hepatectomy. Our group has previously studied hepatectomy after hepatic arterial infusion pumps and found a 5-year overall survival rate of 56%, which is a strong argument for its use in the advanced liver cancer population amenable to surgery. This current study is also in agreement with those that have studied TACE before a hepatectomy. In a study conducted by Allard et al, patients who experienced a pathologic response of <90% had a 3 year survival of 48%, which is very similar to our experience. Our data and that of others only further supports that TARE should not be viewed as a palliative treatment for advanced liver disease, but rather an opportunity to reexamine a patient’s response to treatment for evaluation of another course of action.[ , ]
Our review of the current literature shows that TARE followed by hepatectomy can be safe and effective for certain patients, and we hope our study spurs further investigation into the factors that determine what makes a patient have a safer hepatectomy. In the future, we hope to study prognostic factors of adverse events through collaboration with other institutions. We also hope that future study will include more in-depth descriptions of the patient’s post-operative course to further elucidate what might be leading to complications. Our hope is that this current research will encourage institutions to be more confident in using hepatectomy following TARE without fear of risking greater postoperative complications.
Conclusions
With the increasing involvement of multiple disciplines in the care of advanced liver cancer patients, rigorous patient selection may help to aid in selecting patients poised to succeed in the post-hepatectomy course. Further investigation into objective characteristics that predict outcomes might help to refute or deny this claim.
Synopsis
The safety profile of hepatectomy following the transarterial radioembolization (TARE) procedure was investigated and found to be relatively safe when compared with other articles that have studied TARE before hepatectomy. The importance of this finding should warrant further consideration of post-TARE interdisciplinary meetings to reevaluate patient care and treatment management.
CREDITS/GRANT ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Medical student research reported in this publication was supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number TL1TR002344. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.
REDCap Supported by Clinical and Translational Science Award (CTSA) Grant [UL1 TR000448] and Siteman Comprehensive Cancer Center and NCI Cancer Center Support Grant P30 CA091842.
Footnotes
COI/DISCLOSURES No conflict of interest has been declared by the author(s).
COI/DISCLOSURES
No conflict of interest has been declared by the author(s).
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT:  The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT:  The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions
REFERENCES
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES