Genome Sequence of a Novel Soil Actinomycete,  Protaetiibacter  sp. Strain SSC-01
Huiquan Duan
a Department of Biological Sciences, Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas, USA
Chamil E. Fernando
a Department of Biological Sciences, Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas, USA
Scott S. Crupper
a Department of Biological Sciences, Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas, USA
Stephen D. Fields
a Department of Biological Sciences, Emporia State University, Emporia, Kansas, USA
Associated Data
This bacterial genome sequence has been deposited in DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession no.  . Raw sequence data used for assembly have been deposited in DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession no.  . The assembly described in this paper is the first version (GenBank accession no.  ).
ABSTRACT
The family  Microbacteriaceae  represents a diverse and important group of soil bacteria in the phylum  Actinobacteria . Here, we report the genome sequence of a soil  Microbacteriaceae  strain,  Protaetiibacter  sp. strain SSC-01, the second putative species of the genus. Iron acquisition and xylose metabolism are central pathways identified in the annotated genome.
ANNOUNCEMENT
The actinobacteria are dominant taxa in temperate soils and make significant contributions to processes such as polysaccharide digestion, antibiotic-based microbial inhibition, heavy metal chelation, and plant growth stimulation . The placement of many of the taxa within the phylum is in flux, and the  Microbacteriaceae  family has undergone numerous recent revisions with newly proposed genera ( , ).
The  Microbacteriaceae  strain SSC-01, which was collected from cultivated garden soil in east central Kansas, United States (38.42N, 95.85W), was isolated by passaging single colonies through multiple rounds of growth on Reasoner’s 2A agar  at 37°C. Other media supporting SSC-01 growth were blood agar (Difco BD, Sparks, MD, USA) with defibrinated sheep’s blood (Hemostat Labs, Dixon, CA, USA) and tryptic soy agar (Difco BD) supplemented with 10 μM FeCl 3 ·6H 2 O. DNA was isolated from bacterial lawns grown on blood agar using the Quick-DNA fungal/bacterial miniprep kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA). SeqMatic LLC (Fremont, CA, USA) prepared a genomic library with the TruSeq protocol targeting a 450-bp insert. Illumina MiSeq sequencing with a 500-cycle TruSeq kit (v.2 chemistry) generated 2,107,131 paired-end 251-bp reads. Adapters were removed with Cutadapt (v.2.5) , resulting in 1,057,609,266 bases of Illumina sequencing. A DNA library for Nanopore MinION sequencing, prepared with the ligation sequencing kit (SQK-LSK109; Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK), generated 24,000 reads averaging 4,285 bp. Illumina and Nanopore reads were uploaded to the public usegalaxy.org server  for processing with FASTQ Groomer (v.1.1.5), fastp (v.0.19.5+galaxy1), and/or Porechop (v.0.2.3) tools ( , ) using default settings. Unicycler (v.0.4.8.0)  was used to assemble 1.5 million paired Illumina reads (252-fold coverage) using 14,856 high-quality MinION reads (21.5-fold coverage) as a scaffold to generate a single 2,958,807-bp contig with a GC content of 71.5%. Circularity was confirmed by identifying Nanopore reads spanning the artificial ends of the assembled contig.
Annotation using the NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline (PGAP) server  identified 2,690 potential protein-coding genes, 52 RNA-coding genes, and 30 pseudogenes. Approximately 33% of the putative proteins have unknown function, but over 20 proteins are predicted to be involved in iron acquisition pathways, including siderophore-based import, hemolysin III toxins, and heme transporters. Hemicellulose metabolism (including xylan and xylose), terpene synthesis, and heavy metal chelation pathways each have 10 or more predicted enzymes, suggesting important roles for this microbe in plant-soil interactions ( ,  ).
Needleman-Wunsch nucleotide alignments of full 16S rRNA gene sequences using NCBI default settings revealed the greatest identity to both  Lysinimonas  KACC 19322 (GenBank accession no.  ) and  Protaetiibacter intestinalis  (originally  Lysinimonas  sp. strain 2DFWR-13) (GenBank accession no.  ) at 98.6%. Global comparative analysis with the RAST SEED viewer  showed that the average identity of all orthologous protein sequences of SSC-01 is higher for  P. intestinalis  than for other closely related species , leading to tentative identification of strain SSC-01 as a  Protaetiibacter  sp. This second putative species of the genus represents a different ecological niche than  P. intestinalis , which was isolated from a larval  Protaetia  moth gut . A Mexico City, Mexico, landfill metagenome (GenBank accession no.  ), however, suggests the existence of other soil  Protaetiibacter  species.
TABLE 1
Species that are closely related to strain SSC-01 that have available complete genomic sequences a
b  Amino acid identity of 30% used as the threshold for orthology.
Data availability.
This bacterial genome sequence has been deposited in DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession no.  . Raw sequence data used for assembly have been deposited in DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession no.  . The assembly described in this paper is the first version (GenBank accession no.  ).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Funding was provided through an Institutional Development Award from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under grant P20 GM103418.
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences or the National Institutes of Health.
REFERENCES
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES