Chromosome 3q26 Gain Is an Early Event Driving Coordinated Overexpression of the  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  Oncogenes in Lung Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Yi Liu
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Ning Yin
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Xue Wang
2 Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Andras Khoor
3 Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Vaishnavi Sambandam
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Anwesha B. Ghosh
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Zoe A. Fields
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Nicole R. Murray
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Verline Justilien
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
Alan P. Fields
1 Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
4 Lead Contact
Conceptualization, Y.L., N.Y., N.R.M., V.J., and A.P.F.; Methodology, Y.L., N.Y., X.W., V.J., and A.P.F.; Formal Analysis, Y.L., N.Y., X.W., V.S., A.B.G., A.K., Z.A.F., and V.J.; Investigation, Y.L., N.Y., X.W., and V.J.; Resources, V.J. and A.P.F.; Data Curation, Y.L. and X.W.; Writing – Original Draft, Y.L. and A.P.F.; Writing – Review and Editing, Y.L., N.Y., X.W., N.R.M., V.J., and A.P.F.; Supervision, V.J., N.R.M., and A.P.F.; Project Administration, A.P.F.; Funding Acquisition, Y.L., N.Y., V.J., and A.P.F.
Associated Data
All RNA-Seq data has been deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus under the accession Number   (GEO:  ).
SUMMARY
Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is a prevalent form of lung cancer exhibiting distinctive histological and genetic characteristics. Chromosome 3q26 copy number gain (CNG) is a genetic hallmark of LSCC present in >90% of tumors. We report that 3q26 CNGs occur early in LSCC tumorigenesis, persist during tumor progression, and drive coordinate overexpression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2 . Overexpression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  in the context of  Trp53  loss is sufficient to transform mouse lung basal stem cells into tumors with histological and genomic features of LSCC. Functionally,  PRKCI  and  SOX2  collaborate to activate an extensive transcriptional program that enforces a lineage-restricted LSCC phenotype, whereas  PRKCI  and  ECT2  collaborate to promote oncogenic growth. Gene signatures indicative of PKCi-SOX2 and PKCi-ECT2 signaling activity are enriched in the classical subtype of human LSCC and predict distinct therapeutic vulnerabilities. Thus, the  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  oncogenes represent a multigenic driver of LSCC.
In Brief
Liu et al. report that three oncogenes,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2 , which are coordinately amplified and overexpressed in lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC), can transform  Trp53 −/−  mouse lung basal stem cells into tumors with histological and genomic features of LSCC and drive oncogenic signaling necessary to maintain a LSCC phenotype.
Graphical Abstract

INTRODUCTION
Lung squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) is a major form of non- small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounting for 30% of lung cancer diagnoses, and exhibiting histological, biochemical, and genetic characteristics distinct from other forms of NSCLC including lung adenocarcinoma (LADC). Copy number gains (CNGs) at chromosome 3q26 and mutation of the tumor sup- pressor gene  TP53  are the most prevalent genetic alterations in LSCC, occurring concomitantly in >90% of LSCC cases. Although multiple 3q26 genes have been implicated in LSCC , it is not clear whether 3q26 CNG is an oncogenic driver of LSCC, and if so, which 3q26 genes are necessary and sufficient to drive LSCC tumorigenesis.
We have previously reported extensive genetic, biological, and biochemical cooperativity between three 3q26 genes,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2 , that contribute to the transformed phenotype of LSCC cells.  PRKCI  (encoding for PKCi) directly phosphorylates SOX2, an event that regulates SOX2 binding to the promoter region of the Hedgehog (Hh) acyl transferase (HHAT) gene and promotes human LSCC tumor-initiating cell (TIC) growth . In addition, PKCi-mediated phosphorylation of ECT2 regulates its guanine nucleotide exchange (GEF) activity toward RAC1, thereby activating proliferative MEK-ERK signaling, and stimulating ribosomal DNA transcription ( ,  ,  ;  ), two pathways required for the transformed growth of LSCC cells.
Here, we assessed whether  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  CNGs and overexpression are early and persistent events in LSCC tumorigenesis, identified and functionally characterized a transcriptional program that is activated by the PKCi-SOX2 signaling axis in LSCC cells and tumors, and assessed the effect of overexpression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  on transformation of mouse lung basal stem cells (LBSCs), a major cell of origin for LSCC. Our results demonstrate that  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  are cooperative 3q26 oncogenes that are necessary and sufficient in the context of  TP53  loss to drive LSCC tumorigenesis.
RESULTS
Coordinate  PRKCI, SOX2 , and  ECT2  CNGs and Overexpression Are Frequent Early Events in LSCC
Interrogation of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) LSCC dataset revealed that  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  CNGs occur concomitantly in ~91% of LSCC tumors . Low CNG (genomic identification of significant targets in cancer [GISTIC] score of +1) and high CNG/gene amplification (GISTIC score of +2) lead to a stepwise increase in  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  expression when compared to tumors without CNG (GISTIC scores 0 or −1) ( – ). Interestingly,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  CNG and overexpression are equally prevalent in early stage I LSCC tumors and later stage tumors ( – ), demonstrating that these are early and persistent events in LSCC tumor initiation and progression.
(A) Oncoprint showing amplification (red, GISTIC score +2) and significant copy number gain (CNG) (pink, GISTIC score +1) of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  in LSCC tumors (n = 478). Blue, shallow copy number deletion (GISTIC score of −1); gray, no alterations in copy number (GISTIC score of 0).
(B–D) Expression of  PRKCI  (B),  SOX2  (C), and  ECT2  (D) in LSCC tumors. Results plotted for all tumor samples ( T/All ; n = 478), normal lung tissues (N; n = 49), and according to  PRKCI  (B) GISTIC score (0,−1, n = 47; +1, n = 223; +2, n = 208),  SOX2  (C) GISTIC score (0,−1, n = 44; +1, n = 202; +2, n = 232), and  ECT2  (D) GISTIC score (0,−1, n = 47; +1, n = 220; +2, n = 211). Data represent median, boxes indicate 25% and 75% confidence intervals; error bars indicate 95% confidence interval. Dots indicate outliers. Comparison was by two-tailed Student’s t test; *p < 1.2 × 10 −9  and **p = 0.003 versus indicated comparator. NS, not significant.
(E) Prevalence of 3q26 CNGs in LSCC by clinical stage. Data represent the percentage of tumors at each clinical stage harboring 3q26 CNG (stage I, n = 230; stage II, n = 155; and stage III+IV, n = 88). No significant difference in 3q26 CNG prevalence was observed across clinical stages as assessed by chi-square analysis. NS, not significant.
(F–H) Expression of  PRKCI  (F),  SOX2  (G), and  ECT2  (H) in LSCC tumors by clinical stages. Data represent median, boxes indicate 25% and 75% confidence intervals, and error bars indicate 95% confidence interval. Dots indicate outliers. Comparison was by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test; *p < 1.2 × 10 −9  compared to normal (n = 49).
PRKCI  Regulates an Extensive  SOX2  Transcriptional Program in LSCC Cells
PKCi regulates SOX2-dependent transcription of Hedgehog (Hh) acyltransferase ( HHAT ), leading to activation of Hh signaling in LSCC cells . To assess whether PKCi regulates SOX2 transcriptional activity more broadly, we conducted RNA sequencing of H1299 cells in which either  PRKCI  or  SOX2  was silenced by validated lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs . H1299 lung carcinoma cells were chosen for analysis because they harbor  PRKCI  and  SOX2  CNG and homozygous  TP53  loss, express elevated PKC i  and SOX2 mRNA and protein, exhibit PKC i -, SOX2-dependent transformed growth, and show activated PKCi-SOX2-HHAT signaling . qPCR confirmed efficient knockdown (KD) of PKC i  and SOX2 in  PRKCI  and  SOX2  KD cells, respectively, and decreased expression of the PKC i -dependent SOX2 transcriptional target  HHAT  ( ;  ).
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed significant regulation (false discovery rate [FDR] q value < 0.25) of 16 oncogenic hallmarks after  PRKCI  KD and 19 after  SOX2  KD; strikingly, 13 of these hallmarks were commonly regulated by  PRKCI  and  SOX2 , suggesting a highly coordinated effect on gene expression . Among the prominent common hallmarks are Hh, Wnt, and Notch, three oncogenic pathways implicated in cancer cell stemness and LSCC tumorigenesis ( ; see  ). Thus, PKC i  regulates a broad SOX2 transcriptional program driving stemness in LSCC cells.
(A) Venn diagram showing overlap (green) between oncogenic hallmarks regulated by  PRKCI  (yellow) and  SOX2  (blue). Genes set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was conducted on RNA-seq gene expression data from  PRKCI  KD,  SOX2  KD, and NT H1299 LSCC cells. Significantly altered GSEA hallmarks are given in  .
(B) Major cancer stem cells related pathways, Hedgehog, Wnt, and Notch, are significantly enriched in LSCC cells by  PRKCI  and  SOX2  (FDR < 0.25).
(C) Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) reveals five major oncogenic signaling pathways coordinately activated in  PRKCI (H). SOX2 (H) versus  PRKCI (L). SOX2 (L) primary LSCC tumors (lane 1), NT versus  PRKCI  KD H1299 cells (lane 2), and NT versus  SOX2  KD H1299 cells (lane 3). Differentially expressed genes that drive pathway activation are listed (gene targets). p values and z scores for pathways are given in  .
(D) Heatmap showing expression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 ,  ECT2 , and identified PKC i -SOX2 gene targets in stage 1 primary LSCC tumors. Tumors exhibiting high  PRKCI  ( PRKCI (H); n = 42) or low  PKCi  expression ( PRKCI (L); n = 42) were compared. Expression of indicated genes is significantly associated with  PRKCI  expression. NS, not significant. p values for individual gene associations are given in  .
(E) Heatmap showing expression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 ,  ECT2 , and the identified PKC i -SOX2 gene targets in stage 1 primary LADC tumors. Tumors exhibiting high  PRKCI  ( PRKCI (H); n = 43) or low  PRKCI  expression ( PRKCI (L); n = 43) were compared. The asterisk (*) indicates a statistically significant association with  PRKCI . p values for individual gene associations are given in  . NS, not significant.
(F–I) Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and ChIP-qPCR to assess binding of SOX2 to the promoter region of the indicated genes in H1299 (F), H520 (G), H2170 (H), and A549 (I) cells expressing either non-target (NT) or  PRKCI  ( PRKCI  KD) shRNA. Results are expressed as percentage input ± SEM and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to NT cells. ND, not detected. NS, not significant. (J–M) qPCR analysis for expression of the indicated genes in H1299 (J), H520 (K), H2170 (L), and A549 (M) cells expressing non-target (NT),  PRKCI  ( PRKCI  KD), or  SOX2  ( SOX2  KD) shRNA. RNA abundance is expressed as fold of NT cells ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to NT cells. ND, not detected. NS, not significant. Significance was assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.
See also   and  , and  ,  , and  .
To identify pathways, and associated genes, that correlate with  PRKCI  and  SOX2  expression in LSCC cells and primary LSCC tumors, we first identified genes differentially expressed in LSCC tumors expressing high  PRKCI  and  SOX2  versus low  PRKCI  and  SOX2  (top versus bottom 20%; n = 44/group) within the TCGA LSCC dataset . We then used RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) to identify genes differentially expressed in NT versus  PRKCI  KD and  SOX2  KD H1299 cells. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) revealed significant enrichment of five oncogenic signaling pathways in primary LSCC tumors expressing high  PRKCI  and  SOX2  (p < 0.05, z score > 1.3): Planar Cell Polarity, Basal Cell Carcinoma, Glioblastoma Multiforme, Notch, and Colorectal Cancer Metastasis signaling pathways ( , lane 1). Strikingly, these same five pathways were also significantly regulated by  PRKCI  and  SOX2  in H1299 cells ( , lanes 2 and 3). Nineteen PKCi-SOX2 target genes were identified whose expression is significantly elevated, and drive pathway enrichment, in all three datasets ( ; see also  ). IPA of gene expression datasets from mouse  Sox2-Pten-Cdkn2ab  ( SOX2-PC ) LSCC and  KP  LADC tumor models , revealed enrichment of the same five oncogenic pathways, and elevated expression of 15/19 potential PKC i -SOX2 target genes, in  SOX2-PC  tumors, suggesting the relevance of these genes and pathways in this LSCC model .
Interestingly, expression of 13/19 PKC i -SOX2 target genes were significantly elevated in stage 1 LSCC expressing high  PRKCI  versus low  PRKCI  , but these genes showed little or no association with  PRKCI  expression in stage 1 LADC , indicating these genes are LSCC-selective  PRKCI  targets (see  ). Expression of PKC i -SOX2 target genes was not inhibited by  ECT2  KD in H1299 cells, or H520 LSCC cells harboring 3q26 CNG, demonstrating that the PKCi-ECT2 signaling axis is not involved in their regulation (  and  ). Thus, PKC i -SOX2 signaling activates an extensive oncogenic transcriptional program in LSCC tumors, but not LADC tumors.
Identification of Direct PKC i -Dependent SOX2 Transcriptional Targets
Many of the identified PKCi-SOX2 target genes contain SOX2 binding motifs near their proximal promoters , suggesting PKC i -SOX2 dependent transcriptional activation. SOX2 chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-qPCR revealed that SOX2 promoter occupancy is significantly reduced in  PRKCI  KD cells compared to NT cells in the majority (9/13) of these genes . Two genes ( NOTCH3  and  ADCY3 ) exhibited SOX2 binding that was unaffected by  PRKCI  KD; two other genes ( PARD6G  and  HEY1 ) exhibited no appreciable SOX2 binding in the presence or absence of PKCi (data not shown). PKC i -dependent SOX2 binding was validated by ChIP-qPCR using a second primer-probe set to each gene . PKC i -dependent SOX2 promoter occupancy was also observed in H520 LSCC cells harboring  PRKCI  and  SOX2  CNG  but not in H2170 LSSC cells without  PRKCI  and  SOX2  CNG , or in A549 LADC cells .  PRKCI  and  SOX2  KD significantly inhibited expression of target genes in H1299 and H520 cells (  and  ) but had little or no effect on gene expression in H2170 or A549 cells (  and  ). Thus, PKCi preferentially regulates SOX2-dependent promoter binding and expression of 9 genes in cells harboring  PRKCI  and  SOX2  CNG.
PKC i -SOX2 Regulated Genes Contribute to Transformed Growth of LSCC Cells
We next assessed the effect of shRNA-mediated knockdown of the 9 direct PKCi-SOX2 regulated genes ( – ) on transformed growth in H1299, H520, H2170, and A549 cells ( – ). In each case, shRNA-mediated KD significantly inhibited transformed growth of H1299, H520, and H2170 cells, but had little or no effect on A549 LADC cells. Interestingly, treatment of H1299 and H520 cells with the PKC i  inhibitor Auranofin (ANF), the GLI inhibitor GANT61, the Smoothened inhibitor LDE225, or the BMP inhibitor LDN-193189 led to dose-dependent inhibition of transformed growth with IC 50  values consistent with target inhibition ( – ; see also  ), whereas H2170 and A549 cells exhibited little or no response. Thus, these genes, and the signaling pathways within which they reside, are selectively involved in transformed growth of cells harboring 3q26 CNG.
(A–D) shRNA-mediated knockdown of the indicated genes in H1299 (A), H520 (B), H2170 (C), and A549 (D) cells using two independent shRNA constructs. Results are presented as fold of NT cells ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to NT cells.
(E–H) Effect of shRNA-mediated knockdown of the indicated genes on soft agar growth of H1299 (E), H520 (F), H2170 (G), and A549 (H) cells. Results are presented as fold of NT cells ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to NT cells. NS, not significant. (I–L) Effect of ANF (I), GANT61 (J), LDE225 (K), and LDN-193189 (L) on soft agar growth in H1299, H520, H2170, and A549 cells. Results are normalized to diluent and represent mean ± SD; n = 5. Significance was assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.
See also  .
PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 Signaling Axes Are Activated in the Classical LSCC Subtype
To assess whether PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling is active in primary LSCC tumors, we generated Eigengenes reflecting PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling activity, respectively. A PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene consisted of the 9 direct PKC i - SOX2 transcriptional targets identified and characterized above. Since PKC i -ECT2 signaling drives rDNA transcription, and ECT2 expression correlates strongly with expression of ribosomal RNA processing genes ( ,  ), our PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene consisted of the 12 ribosomal RNA processing genes that most highly correlate with  PRKCI  and  ECT2  expression the TCGA LSCC dataset (top 10%; indicated in bold in  ). Analysis of the TCGA LSCC dataset (n = 478) revealed that PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores distribute non-randomly across the four distinct LSCC subtypes (Primitive, Classical, Secretory, and Basal) as defined by molecular profiling ( ;  ), with Classical LSCC subtype tumors exhibiting significantly higher PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores than other subtypes . PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores also distribute non-randomly , with Classical and Primitive LSCC subtypes exhibiting higher PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores than other subtypes . Interestingly,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  expression is significantly higher in the Classical LSCC subtype, consistent with the activation of the PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling axes in these tumors ( – ). Analysis of an independent LSCC gene expression dataset  revealed a similar enrichment of PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores in Classical and Primitive LSCC subtype tumors, respectively, providing independent validation (  and  ). Heatmap analysis revealed that the 9 PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene genes are significantly and specifically overexpressed in Classical LSCC tumors (162/478 [34%] of LSCC tumors), whereas the 12 PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene genes are overexpressed in both Primitive and Classical LSCC subtypes . Analysis of a gene expression dataset of bronchial premalignant lesions (PMLs) (n = 431) that were classified into four molecular subtypes: Secretory, Normal-like, Inflammatory, and Proliferative , revealed significantly higher PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores in Proliferative PMLs compared to other subtypes , whereas PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores did not differ significantly across PML subtypes . Thus, PKC i -SOX2 signaling is preferentially activated in Proliferative PMLs, which exhibit a strong association with smoking behavior, increased histological progression to dysplasia, an elevated propensity to progress to LSSC, and genomic features consistent with the Classical subtype of LSCC tumors .
(A) Distribution of PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores across LSCC molecular subtypes. Data presented as percentage of tumors of each indicated subtype within the indicated Eigengene score range. n, number of tumors in the indicated Eigengene score range.
(B) Violin plot showing PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores across LSCC molecular subtypes (Primitive, n = 69; Classical, n = 162; Secretory, n = 115; Basal, n = 132). Middle vertical bar indicates range; box shows the median and 75% and 25% confidence intervals. Width indicates frequency. The asterisk (*) indicates a significant difference between Classical subtype and other subtypes. Significance was assessed by ANOVA test. *p < 4.8 × 10 −18 .
(C) Distribution of PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores across molecular subtypes of LSCC tumors. Data presented as percentage of tumors of each indicate subtype within the indicated Eigengene score range. n, number of tumors in the indicated Eigengene score range.
(D) Violin plot showing the distribution of PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores across LSCC molecular subtypes (Primitive, n = 69; Classical, n = 162; Secretory, n = 115; Basal, n = 132). Middle vertical bar indicates range; box shows the median and 75% and 25% confidence intervals. Width indicates frequency. The asterisk (*) indicates statistically significant difference between Primitive and Classical subtype with other subtypes. Significance was assessed by ANOVA test. *p < 1.6 × 10 −18 .
(E) Heatmap showing 3q26 CNG and expression of the 9 PKC i -SOX2 target genes and the 12 genes in the PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene across molecular LSCC subtypes.
(F) Violin plot showing PKC i -SOX2 Eigengene scores across four molecular subtypes of bronchial premalignant lesions (PMLs; Secretory, n = 136; Normal-like, n = 106; Inflammatory, n = 83; Proliferative, n = 106). Middle vertical bar indicates range; box shows the median and 75% and 25% confidence intervals. Width indicates frequency. The asterisk (*) indicates statistically significant difference between Proliferative subtype and other subtypes. Significance was assessed by ANOVA test. *p < 0.05.
(G) Violin plot showing PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores across molecular subtypes of bronchial premalignant lesions (PMLs; Secretory, n = 136; Normal-like, n = 106; Inflammatory, n = 83; Proliferative, n = 106). Middle vertical bar indicates range; box shows the median and 75% and 25% confidence intervals. Width indicates frequency. Significance was assessed by ANOVA test. NS, no significant differences between subtypes.
See also   and  .
Coordinate Overexpression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  Is Necessary and Sufficient to Drive LSCC Tumorigenesis
 performed genomic profiling of 39 human pulmonary carcinoma  in situ  (CIS) lesions and classified them as either progressive or regressive based on whether they subsequently progressed to LSCC. Interrogation of these data revealed that 3q26 CNG , and elevated expression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  ( – ), are significantly associated with progressive CIS lesions. Interestingly, progressive CIS lesions also exhibited a significantly higher incidence of  TP53  mutations (28/29) than regressive lesions (5/10), whereas mutations in other tumor suppressors were detected with much lower prevalence and did not significantly associate with progressive versus regressive lesions . Interestingly, three of the regressive CIS lesions harboring a  TP53  mutation and 3q26 CNG ultimately progressed to LSCC after the preset clinical endpoint, making the correlation between these genetic alterations and oncogenic progression even stronger. Analysis of the TCGA LSCC dataset revealed that  TP53  mutation is by far the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor gene in LSCC (~86% of tumors), rivaling in frequency, and occurring concomitantly with,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  CNGs . Like 3q26 CNG ,  TP53  mutations are detected at equally high frequency in early- and late-stage LSCC tumors , consistent with the early acquisition of  TP53  mutation in progressive premalignant CIS lesions .
(A) Heatmap showing the distribution of chromosome 3q26 CNGs and mutations in tumor suppressor genes  TP53 ,  CDKN2A/CDKN2B ,  PTEN ,  KEAP1 , and  STK11  in progressive and regressive CIS lesions. Blue bars, CIS lesions with 3q26 copy number gain. Red bars, CIS lesions with mutation. White bars, CIS lesions without alterations. Significance was assessed by chi-square analysis. *p < 0.05. NS, not significant.
(B–D) Expression of  PRKCI  (B),  SOX2  (C), and  ECT2  (D) mRNA in regressive (Reg.) and progressive (Prog.) CIS lesions. *p < 0.05 compared to regressive CIS lesions.
(E) qPCR analysis for expression of  Trp63 ,  Ngfr ,  Krt14 ,  Aqp3 ,  Krt5 ,  Sox2 ,  Prkci , and  Ect2  in isolated mouse lung basal stem cells (LBSCs). RNA abundance expressed as fold of total lung epithelial cells (TLECs). Values represent mean ± SEM and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3.
(F) Effect of Ad-Cre on expression of  Trp53  in LBSCs. qPCR of mRNA (lower panel) and genomic DNA (upper panel) for  Trp53  RNA and DNA, respectively, in LBSCs treated with Ad null (Null) or Ad-Cre (Cre) virus. Trp53 mRNA abundance normalized to mouse ubiquitin C. Values represent mean ± SEM and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. unrec., unrecombined; rec., recombined; ND, not detected.(G) Overexpression of  SOX2  and  PRKCI  in LBSCs. Immunoblot analysis of LBSCs transduced with the indicated lentivirus for PKC i  and SOX2. Actin is included as a loading control. Lysate from an equivalent number of H520 cells served as a comparator.
(H–J) Effect of  Trp53  loss and overexpression of  SOX2  and  PRKCI  on LBSC morphology (H), sphere number (I), and sphere size (J) in three-dimensional Matrigel culture. Results in (H) are representative bright-field and immunofluorescence images stained for E-cadherin (red) and DAPI (blue). Scale bars, 100 μm. Results in (I) are normalized to  Trp53 +/+  and represent mean ± SEM; n = 6. Results in (J) represent mean ± SEM; n > 50; *p < 0.05 comparing to  Trp53 +/+  cells; **p < 0.05, comparing to  Trp53 −/−  control vector cells; ***p < 0.05 comparing  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs. V, control vector.
(K) Immunoblot analysis of LBSCs expressing  SOX2  (S) or  SOX2  and  PRKCI  ( S ,  P ) for total SOX2 and phospho-T118 SOX2.
(L) qPCR analysis of  Trp53 −/−  and  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs for expression of PKC i -SOX2 target genes. Results represent mRNA abundance relative to  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs ± SEM and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs.  S ,  SOX2 ;  P ,  PRKCI . Significance was assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.
See also  .
We next established an  ex vivo  model to directly assess whether combined  Trp53  loss, and  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  overexpression, is sufficient to drive transformation of mouse lung basal stem cells (LBSCs), a prominent cell of origin for LSCC ( ;  ;  ;  ). As expected, LBSCs from  Trp53 fl/fl  mice  express elevated basal cell markers Tumor Protein 63 ( Tp63 ), Nerve Growth Factor Receptor ( Ngfr ), Keratin 14 ( Krt14 ), Aquaporin 3 ( Aqp3 ), and Keratin 5 ( Krt5 ) compared to total lung epithelial cells (TLECs) . LBSCs also express higher  Sox2 , and similar  Prkci  and  Ect2 , levels compared to TLECs.
Adenovirus-Cre recombinase (Ad-Cre) induced loss of  Trp53 fl/fl  alleles and  Trp53  expression, mimicking the  TP53  inactivation observed in progressive CIS lesions and LSCC tumors . Transduction of  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs with  SOX2  alone, or together with  PRKCI , achieved SOX2 and PKC i  protein levels comparable to H520 cells harboring 3q26 CNG . Interestingly,  Trp53 −/−  and Ad Null-treated  Trp53 fl/fl  LBSCs form spheres of similar morphology in three-dimensional Matrigel culture . However,  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs cultures exhibit an increase in sphere number and size compared to Ad Null-treated  Trp53 fl/fl  LBSC cultures (  and  ), consistent with the established role of  Trp53  loss in LBSC proliferation  ex vivo  . Indeed, we find that Ad Null-treated  Trp53   fl/fl  LBSCs fail to grow after serial passaging, whereas  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs continue to grow as non-transformed spheres upon serially passaging (data not shown).
Overexpression of  SOX2  in  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs ( S/Trp53 −/− LBSCs) leads to a small but significant increase in sphere number and size (  and  ) while retaining morphology similar to Ad-Null and  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs .  SOX2/PRKCI/Trp53 −/−  ( S/P/Trp53 −/− ) LBSCs exhibit a further increase in sphere number and size (  and  ), accompanied by a profound change in morphology from a single layer of highly polarized epithelial cells, to disorganized cellular masses exhibiting loss of cell polarity .  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs express elevated phospho-Thr 118 -SOX2  and increased expression of the 9 validated direct PKC i -SOX2 transcriptional targets . Thus,  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs exhibit enhanced proliferation, morphological transformation, and activated PKC i -SOX2 signaling consistent with that observed in human Proliferative PMLs, progressive CIS lesions, and Classical LSCC tumors.
ECT2  Enhances Proliferation of  PRKCI -,  SOX2 - Transformed LBSCs
Expression of  ECT2  in  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs ( S/P/E/Trp53 −/− LBSCs) to levels comparable to H520 cells , caused an increase in sphere number and size compared to  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, while retaining morphology induced by  PRKCI  expression ( – ).  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs exhibit increased abundance of  Mmp10  and  45S  ribosomal RNA  and elevated levels of PKC i -induced phospho-Thr 328 -ECT2 , biochemical changes consistent with activation of oncogenic PKCi-ECT2 signaling ( ,  ,  ). Interestingly, overexpression of  ECT2  in  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs  led to a small but significant increase in sphere size, but no change in sphere number or morphology , indicating that full morphological transformation and enhanced transformed growth of LBSCs occurs only when all three cooperating 3q26 oncogenes are coordinately overexpressed.
(A) Expression of  ECT2  in  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs. Immunoblot analysis for ECT2, PKCi and SOX2 in the indicated LBSCs. Actin is included as a loading control. Lysate from an equivalent number of H520 cells served as a comparator.
(B) Effect of overexpressing ECT2 on the growth and morphology of LBSCs expressing SOX2 and PKC i  grown in three-dimensional Matrigel culture. Representative bright-field and immunofluorescence images stained for E-cadherin (red) and DAPI (blue) are shown. Scale bars, 100 μm.
(C and D) Effect of overexpressing ECT2 on sphere number (C) and size (D). Results in (C) are normalized to  S/P/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs and represent mean ± SEM; n = 6; *p < 0.05. Results in (D) represent mean ± SEM; n < 50; *p < 0.05.
(E) Effect of overexpressing ECT2 on expression of  Mmp10  and ribosomal  45S  RNA in LBSCs. Results represent RNA abundance relative to  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs ± SEM and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05; **p < 1.5 3 10 −5  compared to  Trp53 −/−  LBSCs.
(F) Immunoblot analysis showing expression of total ECT2 and phospho-Thr 328  ECT2 in the indicated LBSCs.
(G–I) Effect of expressing  SOX2  and  ECT2  phosphorylation site mutants on the morphology (G), number (H), and size (I) of LBSCs. Results in (H) were normalized to  Vector/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs and represent mean ± SEM; n = 5; *p < 0.002, **p < 0.001. Results in (I) represent the mean ± SEM; n > 85; *p < 0.0001 compared to Vector control; **p < 0.0001 compared to  SOX2 ,  PRKCI , and  ECT2.  Scale bars, 100 μm.
(J) Effect of silencing PKC i -SOX2 gene targets on  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSC growth. Two independent shRNA constructs were used to knock down the indicated genes in  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSC. Results are presented as fold NT control cells ± SD and are representative of three independent experiments. n = 3. *p < 0.05 compared to NT cells.
(K) Effect of ANF on sphere formation in  S/P/E/Trp53 — / —  LBSCs. Results were normalized to DMSO diluent treatment and represent mean ± SD; n = 4.
(L) Effect of GANT61, LDN193189, and LDE225 on sphere formation in  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs.  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs were treated with 10 μM GANT61, 300 nM LDN193189, and 3 μM LDE225, respectively. Results were normalized to diluent treatment and represent mean ± SD; n = 3. *p < 0.05.  S ,  SOX2 ;  P ,  PRKCI ;  E ,  ECT2 ;  S T118A ,  SOX2  T118A phospho mutant;  E T328A ,  ECT2  T328A phospho mutant. Significance was assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test.
See also  .
To assess the role of PKC i -mediated SOX2 and ECT2 phosphorylation in LBSC transformation, we utilized lentiviruses expressing previously characterized SOX2 and ECT2 mutants,  SOX2 T118A  ( S T118A ) and  ECT2 T328A  ( E T328A ), that cannot be phosphorylated by PKC i  ( ,  ;  ). As expected,  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs produced large, proliferative cell masses exhibiting loss of cell polarity, whereas  S T118A /P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs produce polarized cysts resembling  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, but of increased size comparable to  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs ( – ). In contrast,  S/P/E T328A /Trp53 −/−  LBSCs produced spheres with morphology consistent with  S/P/ E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs but of a smaller size consistent with  S/P/ Trp53 −/−  LBSCs. Thus, PKCi and PKCi-phosphorylatable SOX2 are required for increased sphere formation and loss of polarity characteristic of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, whereas ECT2 is largely dispensable for these phenotypes. Conversely, PKC i  and PKC i -phosphorylatable ECT2 are required for the enhanced growth exhibited by  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, a phenotype that is less dependent upon wild-type SOX2. Thus, the PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling axes play critical but distinct roles in the transformed phenotype of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs.
We next used two independent lentiviral shRNA constructs to knock down of each of the nine PKC i -SOX2 target genes  and assessed the effect on transformed growth of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs . In each case, target gene knockdown induced a significant decrease in the number of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSC spheres, indicating that each of these PKC i -SOX2 target genes contributes to mouse LBSC transformation. Treatment of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs with ANF revealed that these cells are extremely sensitive to PKC i  inhibition, exhibiting an IC 50  of 10 nM . Furthermore, treatment of  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs with GANT61, LDE225, and LDN- 193189 at concentrations that inhibited transformed growth of LSCC cells exhibiting 3q26 CNG ( – ), significantly inhibited sphere growth .
PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  Drive LSCC Tumor Formation  In Vivo
We next assessed whether expression of  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  is sufficient to drive LSCC tumor formation  in vivo . For this purpose,  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  and  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs expressing a Cre-activated luciferase allele ( LSL-luc Rosa26 ) were in- jected orthotopically into the lungs of syngeneic mice using established protocols ( ;  ,  ,  ). IVIS imaging revealed that  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs form small, slow-growing lesions whose growth plateaus after approximately 4 weeks . In contrast,  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs generate larger, exponentially growing tumors  that are clearly detectable by both IVIS and micro-computed tomography (mCT) as distinct intrapulmonary masses . Histological analysis revealed that  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs form small benign cysts consisting of a single epithelial cell layer surrounding largely empty lumens reminiscent of  S/Trp53 — / —  LBSC cultures  ex vivo  ( , upper panel, left). In contrast,  S/P/E/ Trp53 — / —  LBSC tumors exhibited classical LSCC pathology characterized by nuclear atypia, loss of cyst-like glandular architecture, prominent intercellular bridges, and prominent extracellular keratin pearls ( , middle panel, left). All  S/P/E/Trp53 — / —  LBSC tumors (14 tumors from three independent experiments) exhibited similar LSCC pathology that was clearly distinct from that of mouse  KP  LADC tumors, which consisted of solid masses of polygonal cells with frequent nuclear atypia, abnormal mitoses, and multinucleated giant cells characteristic of classical, solid LADC ( , lower panel, left).  S/Trp53 −/−  and  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  lesions retain expression of SOX2, and the basal cell markers TP63 and KRT5, confirming their squamous nature ( , upper and middle panels). Interestingly,  S/Trp53 −/−  lesions exhibit low KI67 staining consistent with limited proliferative potential, whereas  S/P/E/ Trp53 −/−  tumors show elevated KI67 staining indicative of aggressive growth ( , upper and middle panels, right).
(A) Growth of  S/Trp53 −/−  and  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs as lung orthotopic tumors in syngeneic mice. Results represent mean bioluminescence flux ± SEM. n = 5. Significance was assessed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test. *p < 0.05 compared to  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs.
(B) Representative  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  lung orthotopic LBSC tumor sequentially imaged by IVIS and μCT at 8 weeks post-inoculation. The bioluminescence and μCT datasets were co-registered in 3D using the Living Image 4.1 soft ware.
(C) Histological and immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of  S/Trp53 — / —  and  S/P/E/Trp53 — / —  LBSC tumors. Sections from  S/Trp53 −/−  and  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSC tumors stained with hematoxylin/eosin (H&E), and by IHC for SOX2, TP63, KRT5, and KI67. Analysis of LSL -Kras G12D /Trp53 — / —  ( KP ) LADC tumors is included for comparison. Scale bars, 50 μm.
(D) IHC for PKCi-SOX2 target genes. H&E and IHC staining for WNT11, GLI2, LEF1, and PKCi, in  S/Trp53 −/−  LBSC,  S/P/E/Trp53 — / —  LBSC and  KP  tumors.  S ,  SOX2 ;  P ,  PRKCI ;  E ,  ECT2 . Scale bars, 50 μm.
In contrast,  KP  LADC tumors stain negative for the squamous markers SOX2, TP63, or KRT5, but stain positively for KI67, consistent with their highly proliferative nature ( , lower panels).
We next characterized  S/Trp53 −/− ,  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  and  KP  lesions for expression of direct PKCi-SOX2 transcriptional targets. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed that  S/Trp53 −/−  lesions express low but detectable levels of WNT11, GLI2, and LEF1, and moderate levels of PKC i  ( , upper panels).  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LSCC tumors express elevated levels of each of these markers, consistent with activation of the PKC i -SOX2 transcriptional program ( , middle panels). In contrast,  KP  LADC tumors expressed low levels of WNT11, GLI2, and LEF1, despite expressing elevated PKC i  ( , lower panels). These data support the conclusion that the PKC i -SOX2 transcriptional program identified here is selectively activated in LSCC tumors but not in LADC tumors.
DISCUSSION
We have characterized extensive biochemical and functional links between three 3q26 candidate driver genes,  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2 , in LSCC biology ( ;  ,  ,  ). Here, we report that CNG and coordinate overexpression of  PRKCI ,  ECT2 , and  SOX2  are common and early events in LSCC tumor development. Importantly, we found that  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  overexpression in the context of  Trp53  loss is sufficient to transform LBSCs, a major cell of origin for LSCC, and drive formation of tumors with pathological and biochemical characteristics of LSCC. Our data provide compelling evidence that  PRKCI ,  SOX2 , and  ECT2  are cooperating oncogenic drivers of LSCC tumorigenesis, and that  PRKCI- ,  SOX2- , and  ECT2- driven LSCC tumor formation is dependent upon PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling pathways that are activated by direct PKC i -mediated SOX2 and ECT2 phosphorylation.
SOX2  is a well-established lineage-restricting oncogene ( ;  ) that can induce squamous tumors in transgenic mouse models ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ). SOX2 transcriptional targets have been identified through ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses, and it is clear that  SOX2  transcriptional programming is critical for its oncogenic activity. However, while a few SOX2 target genes have been functionally validated, including  EVT4 ,  CDKN1A , and  CXCL5  ( ;  ;  ), the role of many other  SOX2  targets in SOX2-dependent squamous transformation has not been verified. We have identified 9 direct PKC i -dependent SOX2 gene targets and functionally characterized their role in LSCC trans- formation. Interestingly, many of these PKC i -SOX2 target genes were also identified as potential SOX2 targets in the studies cited above, suggesting that they may be major drivers of SOX2 oncogenesis in multiple contexts. The direct PKC i - SOX2 transcriptional targets identified herein reside in three oncogenic pathways, Hh, Wnt, and Notch, each of which can be pharmacologically targeted with small molecular inhibitors. In this regard, LSCC tumor cells exhibiting PKC i -SOX2-driven activation of these pathways are highly responsive to the growth-inhibitory effects of PKC i , SMO, GLI, and BMP inhibitors. Finally, genomic signatures reflective of PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 signaling activity are enriched in the Classical LSCC subtype, suggesting that Classical LSCC tumors may be responsive to these pathway inhibitors. Our current results significantly advance our molecular understanding of oncogenic SOX2 transcriptional programming, and identify potential pharmacologic vulnerabilities associated with SOX2-driven LSCC tumors that could improve therapeutic treatment of these aggressive tumors.
Genetically engineered mouse models of SOX2-dependent squamous tumorigenesis demonstrate that SOX2 can collaborate with loss of multiple tumor suppressor genes, including  Pten ,  Cdkn1a ,  Cdkn2a/b ,  Lkb1 ,  Keap1 ,  Trp53 , and  Nkx2–1  ( ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ;  ), and can induce tumors with squamous histology in multiple cells of origin through trans differentiation. These data attest to the powerful lineage-restricted oncogenic potential of  Sox2  and may provide critical insights into the genetic and biology of LADC with squamous or adenosquamous characteristics. The proportion of early human squamous lesions with  PTEN  and  CDKN2A/B  alterations is relatively small, and their loss is not significantly associated with progressive versus regressive squamous CIS lesions. Thus, mutation of these tumor suppressors, while clearly relevant to LSCC, may contribute preferentially to LSCC progression rather than initiation.
TP53  is the most frequently mutated tumor suppressor in LSCC and is significantly associated with 3q26 CNG both in LSCC tumors and progressive CIS lesions, suggesting that  TP53  loss plays a critical role in LSCC initiation. Interestingly,  Trp53  has been shown to control proliferation and differentiation of progenitor cells including regional airway stem cells  and inactivation of  Trp53  promotes LBSC self-renewal  in vivo  . Our newly described model of LSCC tumor initiation, driven solely by collaboration of three key 3q26 oncogenes and loss of  Trp53 , provides a valuable complement to previously described LSCC models, and represents a genetically tractable model of the Classical subtype of LSCC, the most prevalent LSCC molecular subtype.
The recurrent 3q26 amplicon contains a number of additional potential drivers or modifier genes that may be of biologic and therapeutic relevance to LSCC tumorigenesis . Further studies will be necessary to determine the contributory role of other 3q26 genes in LSCC tumorigenesis . Our  ex vivo  LSCC model should prove useful in identifying and characterizing the involvement of additional 3q26 genes in LSCC tumorigenesis. A major advantage of our model is that it allows precise, temporally controlled targeting of multiple gene manipulations exclusively to a defined LSCC cell of origin, LBSCs. Our model also facilitates biochemical and genetic dissection of the roles of specific genetic alterations, and their associated signaling pathways, in LSCC initiation and progression  ex vivo , and in tumor initiation and maintenance in syngeneic mice  in vivo . Finally, our genetically tractable model of 3q26-driven LSCC provides a platform for pre-clinical evaluation of new therapeutic strategies targeting specific molecular signaling mechanisms involved in LSCC tumorigenesis.
STAR⋆METHODS
LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dr. Alan P. Fields . All unique/stable reagents generated in this study are available from the Lead Contact with a completed Materials Transfer Agreement.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Human Cell lines 
Human lung carcinoma cell lines (H1299 male, H520 male, H2170 male and A549 male) were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and maintained in low passage culture as recommended. Cells were grown as oncospheres in serum-free DMEM-F12 (1:1) medium (Life Technologies) and maintained in ultra-low attachment flasks (Corning, NY). Growth media was modi- fied by adding 50 mg/ml insulin and 0.4% Albumin Bovine Fraction V from (Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, MO), N2 Plus Media Supplement and B-27 Supplement (Life Technologies), 20 mg/ml EGF and 10 mg/ml basic FGF purchased from (PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ). All cultures were maintained in a humidified tissue culture incubator at 37°C in 5% CO 2 .

Establishment of  ex vivo  LBSC cultures 
Trp53  conditional null mice ( Trp53 fl/fl ) (8~10 weeks old; both male and female) were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine by intraperitoneal injection. The mice were exsanguinated and the trachea was isolated in cold DMEM:F12 2X P/S/F media and opened to expose the lumen using dissecting scope. The trachea was incubated in Dispase (16U/ml) for 40 min followed by DNase I (0.5mg/ml) for 30 min at room temperature. The digested tracheas were transferred to a dish containing fresh media. Using 2 pair of forceps, sheets of epithelial cells were stripped off from digested trachea and subsequently trypsinized to obtain single cell suspension. Cell suspensions were filtered through 40 micron cell strainers (Falcon, BD). The Fc interactions were blocked with CD16/CD32 antibody for 15 min at room temperature and stained with TROP2 and CD49f antibodies and sorted for TROP2 + / CD49f +  LBSCs. The LBSCs were treated with Adenovirus-Cre recombinase to remove  Trp53 f/f  alleles and grown embedded in 50% Matrigel for approximately 21 days. After establishing  Trp53 — / —  LBSC cells, the cells were dissociated from Matrigel, treated with polybrene (2–5 mg/ml) and incubated with appropriate volume of recombinant lentivirus expressing  SOX2 ,  PRKCI  or  ECT2  cDNAs in serum free DMEM:F12 media for 6–8 hours on Matrigel in a humidified tissue culture incubator at 37°C in 5% CO 2 . The cells were re-embedded in Matrigel and maintained in 3D Matrigel culture for approximately 21 days. For sphere formation assays, cells were released from Matrigel (BD Biosciences), and dissociated into single cells by trypsinization. Cells were counted and resus- pended in 50% Matrigel and plated in Matrigel coated plates at a density of 1000 cells per well.

Orthotopic mouse LBSC tumor studies 
S/Trp53 — / — , and  S/P/E/Trp53 — / —  LBSCs were injected orthotopically into the left lungs (final volume 50 ml) of 8~10 weeks old wild-type C57BL/6 mice (both male and female) using a 30-gauge needle. For IVIS and μCT imaging, mice were anaesthetized by isoflurane inhalation, administered 150 mg kg −1  d-luciferin by intraperitoneal injection and placed in a mouse imaging shuttle device that maintains the sedated mouse in a stationary position. At 8 minutes after luciferin injection, bioluminescence was measured using a Perkin Elmer IVIS imaging system (Caliper Life Sciences-Xenogen, Hopkinton, MA). For μCT imaging, mice were scanned for 4 min under isoflurane anesthesia using a small animal Quantum FX μCT (PerkinElmer) at 45 μm resolution, 90 kV, with 160 μA current. Images were acquired using PerkinElmer Quantum GX software. The bioluminescence optical and CT datasets were co-registered in 3-D using the Living Image 4.5 software. Mouse lung tissues were prepared for histology and hematoxylin/eosin staining was per- formed as previously described . All animal experiments were performed under an approved IACUC protocol of Mayo Clinic.
METHOD DETAILS

Total Lung Epithelial Cell (TLEC) Cultures 
Mice were anesthetized with ketamine/xylazine by intraperitoneal injection. The trachea was isolated, cannulated and the lungs perfused with 10ml 0.9% saline. Dispase (3 ml) was injected into the lung through the trachea followed by 0.5 mL agarose (45°C). Lungs were immediately covered with ice for 2 min, removed from the mice, and incubated in 3 mL dispase for 45 min at room tem- perature. Lungs were subsequently transferred to tissue culture dishes with HEPES-buffered DMEM (100 U/ml DNase I per 7 ml), and lung tissue was gently teased into small pieces. Cell suspensions were filtered through cell strainers and red blood cells were lysed by Ammonium chloride solution. Cells were further purified through CD45/CD31 negative selection as described previously . Total lung epithelial cells were resuspended and cultured in Matrigel-coated plates.

Histology, Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence 
Mice were sacrificed, exsanguinated, and lungs processed for histologic and immunohistochemical analysis as previously described . Briefly, the tissue was deparaffinized by placing slides into three changes of xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. The rehydrated tissue samples were rinsed in water and subjected to antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH 6.0). Slides were treated with 3% H 2 O 2  for 5 minutes to reduce endogenous peroxidase activity and washed with PBS containing 0.5% (w/v) Tween 20 and incubated with the indicated antibodies: SOX2, TP63, KRT5, KI67, WNT11, GLI2, LEF1 and PKCi. Slide images were captured and analyzed using a ScanScope scanner and ImageScope software (Aperio Technologies).
For immunofluorescence staining, spheres were released from Matrigel, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Paraffin embedded spheres were sectioned, mounted on slides and deparaffinized by placing slides into three changes of xylene and rehydrated in a graded ethanol series. The rehydrated sections were rinsed in water and subjected to antigen retrieval in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) followed by permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, blocked with 1% BSA, glycine and 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS, and incubated with E-cadherin (1:500) diluted in 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20 in PBS at 4C overnight. Sections were washed 3 times with PBS and incubated with Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibody (1:500) diluted in 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween 20 for 1hour at room temperature. Sections were then washed 3 times in PBS and coverslipped Prolong Gold anti-fade mounting medium containing 4, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI). Images were captured using an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope (Olympus) with a 10X objective).

Immunoblot protein expression assay 
For protein expression analysis, total cell lysates were resolved using gradient SDS-PAGE (Novex, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Immobilon-P; Millipore). Membranes were incubated with the appropriate primary antibodies followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechology (Santa Cruz, CA). Proteins bands were visualized by chemiluminescence detection (Perkin-Elmer Life Sciences) using KODAK BioMax MR Film (Carestream Health, Rochester, NY).

Lentiviral RNAi Constructs and Transfections 
Lentiviral vectors containing human and mouse NT, PKC i , SOX2, ECT2 and potential targets shRNA were obtained from Sigma, packaged into recombinant lentivirus, and used to establish stable cell transfectants as described previously . LSCC and LADC cells, as well as  SOX2/PRKCI/ECT2/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, were transduced with recombinant lentivirus and stable transfectants were selected for puromycin resistance. Knock down efficiency of PKCi, SOX2, ECT2 and potential targets was assessed by measuring the mRNA levels by QPCR. An NT control vector that does not recognize any mouse or human genes was used as a negative control. Sequences of all lentiviral shRNA constructs are listed in  .
KEY RESOURCES TABLE

RNA sample preparation 
Total RNA was extracted from three independent spheroid cultured H1299 NT RNAi, PKCi RNAi and SOX2 RNAi cells using the RNAqueous phenol-free total RNA isolation protocols (Ambion, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY). Extracted RNA was subjected to DNase treatment to eliminate DNA contamination according to provider’s instructions using TURBO DNA-free ™  (Ambion, Life Technologies, CA). Quality of RNA samples was determined using an Agilent Bioanalyzer and only samples with RINs > 9.0 were used for genomic sequencing analysis. Sequencing was carried out at Mayo Clinic Advanced Genomic Technology Center at Rochester, MN. RPKM-normalized gene counts were generated and used to perform Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA).

Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay 
Cells were harvested by centrifugation and crosslinked to final 1% formaldehyde (Thermo Scientific) for 10 min at room temperature. The protein-DNA cross-linking reaction was quenched using 250 mM glycine for 5 min. Cells were washed with 1X-PBS and re-suspended in cell lysis buffer (1% Nonidet P-40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris$HCl, (pH 8.0), 25 μM MG-132, and 1X Complete protease inhibitor (Roche) mixture). After 10 min of incubation on ice, cells were digested with MNase (NEB) and incubated in the Isotemp (Fisher Scientific) at 37C for 10 min. Then samples are sonicated in the Diagenode Bioruptor (15 cycles in Stop/ChIP buffer: 30 s On, 30 Sec Off). In this condition, at least 80%–90% of chromatins are digested into mono- and di-nucleosomes. After sonication, cells were centrifuged at 15,000 x rpm for 10 min to remove debris, the clarified supernatant was transferred to fresh tubes and one percent of the supernatant was saved as input to compare and analyze antibody pull-down. The remainder of each supernatant was incubated overnight at 4C with specific SOX2 or non-specific rabbit IgG antibody as indicated in the figures. After addition of protein G-magnetic beads (Invitrogen), samples were incubated at 4C on a tube rocker for 4 hr. Protein G-magnetic beads were sequentially washed with the following buffers: a) low salt wash [20 mM Tris•Cl, (pH 8.1), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM, EDTA, and 1 3 Complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche)], b) high salt wash [20 mM Tris•Cl, (pH 8.1), 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 2 mM EDTA], c) LiCl wash [10 mM Tris$Cl, (pH 8.1), 250 mM LiCl, 1% deoxycholate, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1 mM EDTA], and d) T.E wash (twice) [10 mM Tris•Cl, (pH 8.1), 1 mM EDTA]. All the washes were performed at 4C for 10 min followed by centrifuge at 9000 RPM (1 min) to remove the supernatant. After washing, bound DNA was eluted in 1% SDS, 100 mM NaHCO 3 . Cross-linking was reversed by incubating at 65 ○ C overnight in elution buffer after addition of 200 mM NaCl. DNA was purified and eluted using MinElute PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN).

QPCR mRNA expression and ChIP-QPCR 
Gene expression was assessed using TaqMan Fast Universal PCR Master Mix. QPCR amplification analysis was performed using Applied Biosystems ViiA7 thermal cycler (Foster City, CA). QPCR reagents were purchased from Applied Biosystems or custom designed from Invitrogen. Relative mRNA expression values were determined by using human GAPDH or mouse Ubc as internal controls. Fold change (FC) of expression was calculated by FC = 2 -DDCt . See   for QPCR Primers used.
For enrichment analysis, QPCR was performed using primer sets designed by Primer 3  to amplify the promoter regions of the potential genes (ChIP-QPCR primers are listed in  ) using SYBR Green (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) dye detection on an Applied Biosystems ViiA7 thermal cycler. The comparative Ct method was used for quantitation, and ChIP enrichment was determined as % input.

Anchorage-independent growth and Clonal expansion assay 
Anchorage-independent growth was assessed by the ability of cells suspended in agarose to form colonies (SeaPlaque GTG Agarose from Lonza, Rockland, ME). Complete 2X media was mixed with 0.8% agarose at 1:1 ratio to achieve a final agar concentration of 0.4% in growth media plated into 35 mm tissue culture dishes to create bottom layer of soft agar. Single cell suspensions containing 5,000–10,000 cells per plate were mixed in soft agar and dispensed over the solidified bottom layer of soft agar. For drug dose response studies, inhibitors to PKC i  (Auranofin), GLI2 (GANT61), BMP7 (LDN193189), and SMO (LDE 225) were added to the soft agar at plating at the concentrations detailed in figures. Plates were incubated at 37C in 5% CO2 and colony growth assessed after 4–5 weeks. For drug studies on  S/P/E/Trp53 −/−  LBSCs, inhibitors were added to both layers of growth factor reduced Matrigel at the concentrations indicated in the figure legend. Plates were incubated at 37C in 5% CO2 and sphere number assessed after 10 days. Plates were stained with Giemsa (EMD Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) for quantification. Briefly, plates were fixed in meth- anol for 20 min followed by two 1X-PBS wash. Giemsa stain was diluted (1:20) in 1X-PBS and fixed colonies were stained at room temperature for 1–2 hr. Stained plates were washed with 1X-PBS and plates were imaged using BioSpectrum (UVP, Upland, CA). Colony number on soft agar was determined using ImagePro Plus version 7 software. The spheroids on Matrigel were quantified on day 10 under microscope (4X magnification).

Computational Analysis 
We downloaded the data of primary LSCC and LADC tumors from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data portal . We collected RNA-seq data from 527 LSCC samples which include 478 patients diagnosed with LSCC and 49 normal epithelial tissues adjacent to primary LSCC tumors. The scaled expression data was used for data analysis . To identify chromosome 3q26 amplification is a prominent feature of LSCC, we classified tumors with different copy number alterations using GISTIC (Genomic Identification of Significant Targets in Cancer) software. To investigate PKC i -SOX2 dual mediated target genes, we further divided the 478 samples into two groups based on their PKC i  and SOX2 expression values; the PKC i H.SOX2H group contained 44 LSCC samples with 20% of tumors expressing the highest levels of PKC i  and SOX2; and 44 LSCC samples with 20% of tumors expressing the lowest levels of PKCi and SOX2 comprised the PKCiL.SOX2L group. To investigate 3q26 upregulation is an early clinical event in LSCC but not in LADC, 230 clinical stage I LSCC tumors and 214 clinical stage I LADC tumors were analyzed ranking by PKC i  expression. Statistical differences between samples were assessed with two way unpaired t test or Chi-square test.
Independent dataset   was downloaded from the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database to validate PKC i -SOX2 transcriptional pathways/targets.   was downloaded to analyze TP53 mutation, 3q26 CN and PKC i , SOX2, and ECT2 expression in regressive and progressive LSCC CIS lesions.   was downloaded to analyze PKC i -SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores across 4 LSCC pre-malignant lesion sub-types.   was downloaded to validate PKC i - SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 Eigengene scores across 4 LSCC sub-types.
QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) 
The Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) software is publicly available from the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University . RPKM-normalized gene counts from H1299 RNA-seq were downloaded to GSEA software for hallmark analysis (version h.all.v6.2). Analysis of differentially enriched hallmarks (NT RNAi versus PKC i  RNAi, or SOX2 RNAi) in H1299 cells was performed separately. GSEA was performed using the gene permutation option and gene sets smaller than 15 or larger than 500 were excluded. The false discovery rate (FDR) of hallmark with less than 0.25 (FDR < 0.25) was considered as significant enriched.

Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) 
Genes that were up (or down) regulated in PKCiH.SOX2H group and that responded to PKCiL.SOX2L group with significance (p < 0.05) and folder change (F > 1.5) were considered to be differential expressed genes (DEGs) in TCGA LSCC primary tumors. Genes that were up (or down) regulated in oncosphere NT cells and that responded to PKCi (or SOX2) knock down with significance (p < 0.05) and fold change (F > 1.5) were considered to be DEGs in H1299 LSCC cells. Three independent lists of DEGs from TCGA
LSCC primary tumors and LSCC cells were generated and used to perform Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The core analysis was performed using default settings: direct and indirect relationships between molecules supported by experimentally observed data were considered, networks did not exceed 35 molecules, and all sources of data from human, mouse, and rat studies in the Ingenuity Knowledge Base were considered. This generated priority lists for canonical pathways. Score values were calculated from hypergeometric distribution and right-tailed Fisher’s exact test. Canonical pathways were further filtered by log(p value) > 1.3 and Z-score > 1.3.

Eigengene score analysis of TCGA LSCC 
The Eigengene score represents the principal component analysis (PCA) of the expression matrix of PKCi-SOX2 and PKC i -ECT2 genes and positively correlates with mean expression of those genes. The Eigengene score can be applied using the built-in R prcomp and princomp functions.

Statistical Analysis for Experimental Data 
The details of statistical analysis of experiments can be found in the figure legends. Statistical analysis of differences between samples was performed using two-tailed Student’s t tests, and p < 0.05 was defined as significant. The analysis of percentile 3q26 CNGs and TP53 mutations across clinical stages was performed using the chi-square test. When comparing various groups one-way ANOVA statistical test was used applying the Dunnett’s method or Tukey’s method to correct for multiple comparisons. Statistical analysis was performed using the computing environment R.
DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY
All RNA-Seq data has been deposited in Gene Expression Omnibus under the accession Number   (GEO:  ).
Highlights
Supplementary Material
1
2
3
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Ms. Kayla Lewis, Ms. Capella Weems, and Mr. Jorge Lombardi for technical assistance; Dr. Laura Lewis-Tuffin and the Mayo Clinic Cellular Imaging and Flow Cytometry Facility for assistance with cell sorting; Ms. Brandy Edenfield and the Mayo Clinic Cancer Biology Histology Facility for processing tumor tissues for analysis; and the Mayo Clinic Sequencing Facility for RNA-seq runs. We also acknowledge members of the Fields laboratory for critical feedback on the manuscript. This work was supported by grants from the National Institutes of Health/National Cancer Institute (R01 CA081436–22 and R01 CA206267–04 to A.P.F.; R01 CA140290–05 to N.R.M.; and R03 CA235189 to V.J.). A.P.F. is the Monica Flynn Jacoby Professor of Cancer Research, an endowment fund that provides partial support for the investigator’s research program. V.J. was supported in part by a Mayo Clinic Center for Biomedical Discovery Career Development Award and an American Cancer Society Research Scholar Award (RSG-18–201-01). Y.L. and N.Y. are recipients of the Edward C. Kendall Fellowship in Biochemistry from the Mayo Clinic Graduate School.
Footnotes
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information can be found online at  .
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information can be found online at  .
REFERENCES
Other Formats
Actions
Share
RESOURCES